Transluce
Transluce
Transluce
Transluce
Transluce
Transluce
About
News
Incident Reports
Behavior Reports
Docent
Join Us
Incident Reports
Early rogue AI agent activity and attempts to hack found on urlquery.net
Jack Cable*,2, Daniel Chiu*, Francisco Pernice*,3, Selena Zhang*,1, James Anthony1, Tetiana Bas4, Gary Shen4, Conrad Stosz1, Jacob Steinhardt1
1 Transluce · 2 Corridor · 3 MIT · 4 AIUC · * Primary contributors, listed alphabetically
Transluce | Published: September 23, 2026

We present evidence that AI agents used the web security service urlquery.net to bypass restrictions and expand their access to the public internet. The agents also tried on three occasions to hack public data providers, including an Australian government website. We link at least some of this activity to agent swarms previously attributed to OpenAI. We also find evidence of earlier agent activity going back to at least March 6th, 2026, and potentially earlier, predating the previously reported Hugging Face, collusion.wiki, and RubyGems incidents by at least two months.

Download the Data
Get Involved
0
1
10
100
1,000
3,000
Scans per day, UTC timezone
November 2025
Earliest evidence of potential
agent data retrieval attempts
6 March 2026
Agents start tunneling complex usage
through urlquery.net
25–26 May 2026
Agents target
University of
New Mexico
28 May 2026
Agents target
Data USA
20–21 June 2026
Agents target
Australian Institute
of Health and Welfare
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
2025
2026
RubyGems Hack
May 5–June 18
Wiki activity from collusion.wiki
May 24–June 22
Hugging Face Hack
July 9–13
Higher confidence evidence
Moderate confidence evidence
Key Findings
We report three separate incidents between May and June 2026 in which the agents attempted to exploit security vulnerabilities and hack into websites, including an attempt on an Australian government public health website. Notably, the agents did this while attempting mundane data retrieval tasks which were not cyber-related.
This traffic goes back at least to March 6, 2026 and extends as recently as September 16, 2026, suggesting agents may still be exploiting these services to bypass restrictions.
We are releasing a dataset containing tens of thousands of queries apparently made by autonomous AI agents leveraging a URL scanning service to avoid access restrictions. We encourage others to continue looking into the data.
Executive Summary
Note: on the day of publication, Australian Prime Minister Anthony Albanese publicly announced that several government websites had been infiltrated by OpenAI agents, likely overlapping with the incident we describe here. OpenAI released a statement acknowledging their involvement.

Agents attempted to hack three public data sources, including an Australian government website, and some are linked to a known agent swarm.1 We present evidence of AI agents attempting to compromise websites at three domains: Data USA2 (api.datausa.io), the University of New Mexico digital library (nmdigital.unm.edu), and the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW) Tableau collections (viz*.aihw.gov.au). This attempted compromise of AIHW is part of the first reported instance of agents hacking a government. We directly link two of the three (AIHW and Data USA) to a previously reported agent swarm that OpenAI has publicly confirmed originated from them. For all three, we note that the extent of the observed activity is minor, attempting a low number of probe payloads and we observe no evidence of exploitation. While previous reporting showed that agents had interacted with these domains, this discovery reveals that agents attempted to hack into them when other methods of collecting the data they sought failed. Notably, the tasks the agents were trying to solve were not cyber-related; the agents resorted to hacking tactics while working on ordinary data retrieval tasks.

We find evidence of unintended, task-driven agent-like activity starting on March 6th. Records from urlquery.net show agents using the service since at least March 6, 2026, about two months before previously reported swarm activity. The first case, a March 6 attempt to retrieve Thai drug-enforcement statistics, shows an agent escalating as each approach failed: it first requested the data directly, then tried a service that converts web pages into text, and finally packed a custom program into a web address. The same technique shows up in thousands of agent requests recorded by urlquery.net starting in mid-April, targets many of the same data sources as the collusion.wiki swarm, and collapsed the same day the wiki activity did. We also report similar activity that occurred as recently as September 16.

We find weaker evidence of similar data-retrieval agent activity as early as November 2025. November 2025 urlquery.net records reveal bursts of attempts to retrieve statistics of historical theme park data and Thai government data through different URLs. These earlier attempts are less sophisticated and we are less confident that they involve the same agents, but they are consistent with task-directed data retrieval and target the same sources accessed in later activity.

Overall, the evidence is consistent with, but does not prove, that the agents may have learned this behavior over one or more training runs. In November, they may have used urlquery.net simply to look up information. By March, they were finding creative ways around access limits. By May and June, they were gaining more access, including attempting to bypass cyber defenses to complete their tasks.

Hacking attempts against public data providers

Much of the urlquery.net activity appears to come from agents retrieving data to answer web search tasks. For three of these tasks, after failing to retrieve data through normal means, they attempted a variety of cyber exploits against the relevant data service. We tie two of these attempts (those targeting api.datausa.io and viz*.aihw.gov.au) to the prior DseWiki agent swarm activity confirmed to originate from OpenAI based on shared targets, tactics, and timing. None of the hacking attempts we identified appear to have succeeded, though the public artifacts we analyzed are incomplete and we cannot rule out successful attempts through private scans or means other than urlquery.net. This data reveals that malicious cyber activity is not limited to agents tasked with cybersecurity-related tasks and can arise instrumentally to solve mundane tasks like information retrieval.

Agents targeted University of New Mexico’s digital library using exploits like SQL injection and path traversal
Agents targeted Data USA with cross-site scripting and other exploits
Agents targeted the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
Strong evidence of agent activity begins in March 2026, predating known incidents

Beyond the three attempted hacks, our dataset contains thousands of reports of agent activity. This activity begins on March 6, 2026, increases sharply in mid-April, peaks in May and June alongside the collusion.wiki swarm, and collapses on June 22, the day sustained agent activity on the wiki ends.

March-September 2026: a timeline and connection to previous swarm activity
Attempts to create disposable email addresses and to trade cryptocurrency
Potential agent activity begins as early as November 2025

Records from urlquery.net contain suggestive evidence of agent activity as early as November 2025. These records differ from the stronger examples beginning in March: the November reports show repeated requests for specific pages and datasets, whereas later reports use sophisticated techniques matching later attempts to access confirmed agent targets.

November 2025: repeated attempts to retrieve theme-park and Thai government data
Footnotes
We reached out to OpenAI and the three affected organizations on September 21 and 22 to disclose the attempted intrusions to them. ↩
Data USA is a joint project by Deloitte, Datawheel, and MIT's Collective Learning Group that provides open access to U.S. government data. It is not a government website, and is distinct from data.gov. ↩
For instance, the requested URL containing the XSS payload, vizprod.aihw.gov.au/t/Public/views/PBSdashboardallATC1-ATC2medicines-Agegroup/PBSDashboard?:showVizHome=no&:embed=y&:apiID="><svg/onload=document.title="XSS">, queries the same dashboard that has been documented on DseWiki. ↩
The exact question is "In Korea, in what year between 2000 and 2021 did crude oil net imports average above 2,500 kilobarrels per day (2500 kb/d), natural gas net imports total less than 56 billion cubic meters (56 bcm), coal imports exceeded 136 million metric tons (136 Mt) but decreased compared to the year prior." ↩
See records https://search.urlquery.net/report/1ad9c2e8-96ff-44af-b446-b717bcb995b4, https://urlquery.net/report/c08684cc-3da4-4d53-a288-0d014243c075 and https://1.urlquery.net/report/e044dea5-ca3b-4e3c-9083-f422148ffd77. ↩
Appendix
About urlquery.net
About our dataset
Transluce
Transluce
Transluce
Transluce
Transluce
Transluce

Transluce is an independent, nonprofit research lab building the public tech stack for scalable oversight of AI.

Donate
Resources
Research & news
Docent
Tools & demos
Follow Transluce
X (Twitter)
(opens in a new tab)
LinkedIn
(opens in a new tab)
GitHub
(opens in a new tab)
Email us
Company
About us
Join us
(opens in a new tab)
Privacy & Trust Center
(opens in a new tab)
Responsible disclosure

© 2026 Transluce. All rights reserved.

Transluce is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit based in San Francisco.