SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT
The homepage
Tech
Reviews
Science
Entertainment
AI
Policy
Wikipedia operator says OpenAI’s ‘rogue’ bots may be linked to a May outage
NEWS
AI
OPENAI
Wikipedia operator says OpenAI’s ‘rogue’ bots may be linked to a May outage

The Wikimedia Foundation believes OpenAI agents edited wikis, tried to ‘exploit’ a notetaking tool, and made ‘millions’ of automated API requests.

by 
Jay Peters
Oct 5, 2026, 7:05 PM UTC
Image: Cath Virginia / The Verge, Getty Images
Jay Peters is a senior reporter covering technology, gaming, and more. He joined The Verge in 2019 after nearly two years at Techmeme.

Following many recent disclosures about AI agents accessing third-party websites and services, the Wikimedia Foundation, which hosts Wikipedia, says that it “can confirm that we have discovered some activity” by “rogue” OpenAI agents on Wikimedia platforms.

The activity includes edits to Wikimedia wikis, “unsuccessful attempts” to “exploit” the Etherpad note-taking tool that the Wikimedia Foundation hosts, and heavy traffic that the foundation says “may” have contributed to a partial outage that happened in May, according to a blog post. However, the Wikimedia Foundation says it didn’t find evidence that its systems were “used for coordination among agents” (recently, OpenAI bots reportedly hijacked a German wiki site to coordinate) or evidence of systems or data being compromised.

Here’s Wikimedia’s summary of what it saw:

Wiki editing: We’ve identified edits to Wikimedia wikis that we believe are from AI agents operated by OpenAI. These edits were not published to pages with visibility to general readers; almost all of them were testing edits in “sandbox” areas of the wiki. It also included a few edits to the configuration for a citation tool, which we believe were potentially malicious edits that were intended to misuse this tool as a proxy for fetching data from remote services. While Wikipedia policies allow bots to edit when they are disclosed and approved by the community, none of those approvals were sought in these incidents.

Etherpad probing and use: Agents we believe to be operated by OpenAI made some unsuccessful attempts to compromise our public Etherpad, a note-taking tool we host as a community service. Agents unsuccessfully tried to use it to fetch data from other websites as a proxy. Other agents also likely operated by OpenAI took notes about their tasks, though this did not appear to turn into coordination.

Excessive data downloading: Agents we believe to be operated by OpenAI made millions of automated requests to our public APIs to access the knowledge on Wikimedia projects, crawled millions of pages (mainly from our projects Wikidata and Wikimedia Commons), and made hundreds of thousands of data queries to the Wikidata Query Service (WQDS). This traffic may have contributed to a partial outage on WQDS in May.

“The open web is a public good,” the Wikimedia Foundation says. “We should not allow this behavior to become the ‘new normal’ for the people or organizations that maintain it.”

“We appreciate the detailed findings Wikimedia shared with us,” OpenAI spokesperson Drew Pusateri says in a statement. “We’re working with them as we review and analyze the activity they identified along with our overall investigation, and we’ll continue to share relevant information as that work progresses.” OpenAI’s investigation hasn’t been able to verify if its bots contributed to the May outage, according to Pusateri.

Update, October 5th: Added statement from OpenAI.

Follow topics and authors from this story to see more like this in your personalized homepage feed and to receive email updates.
JAY PETERS
AI
NEWS
OPENAI
MOST POPULAR
Most Popular
Our minds aren’t equipped to handle AI
TCL’s paperlike OLED phone made me more excited for the iPhone Duo
The new Fitbit Edge leaks
An AI couldn’t beat humans at StarCraft, so it decided to cheat
The rise, fall, and rise of portable MP3 players
The Verge Daily

A free daily digest of the news that matters most.

Email (required)
SIGN UP
More in News
This startup is issuing AI-generated acne prescriptions
Hyundai CEO says only a ‘level playing field’ can minimize damage from China
OpenAI is adding text watermarking in ChatGPT and Codex
OpenAI PR tells journalist to ‘move on’ while asking Sam Altman about a ChatGPT user’s suicide
Sam Altman says ‘some bad things’ will happen, but AI is totally worth it
Nvidia’s Shield TV Pro just got a $100 price hike
ADVERTISER CONTENT FROM

This is the title for the native ad

Top Stories
OCT 5
Our minds aren’t equipped to handle AI
OCT 5
TCL’s paperlike OLED phone made me more excited for the iPhone Duo
OCT 5
Sam Altman says ‘some bad things’ will happen, but AI is totally worth it
OCT 5
Sen. Adam Schiff on AI regulation, free speech, and impeaching Trump one more time﻿
OCT 5
Hyundai CEO says only a ‘level playing field’ can minimize damage from China
Contact
Tip Us
Community Guidelines
Archives
About
Ethics Statement
How We Rate and Review Products
Cookie Settings
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Your California Privacy Rights
Your Privacy Choices
Cookie Notice
AdChoices
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status
Penske Media Corporation

The Verge is a part of PMX Global, LLC, a subsidiary of Penske Media Corporation.

© 2026 VM Publishing, LLC. All rights reserved.

OUR SITES