Skip to main content
An official EU website
How do you know?

This site uses cookies. Visit our cookies policy page or click the link in any footer for more information and to change your preferences.

Accept all cookies
Accept only essential cookies
EN
Search
Search
Shaping Europe’s digital future
Menu
European approach to artificial intelligence
Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-generated Content

This code of practice supports compliance with the AI Act transparency obligations related to marking and labelling of AI-generated content.

The obligations under Article 50 of the AI Act (transparency obligations for providers and deployers of generative AI systems) address risks of deception and manipulation, fostering the integrity of the information ecosystem. These transparency obligations, applicable from 2 August 2026, complement other rules like those for high-risk AI systems or general-purpose AI models. They pertain to marking and detection of AI-generated content and labelling of deepfakes and certain AI-generated publications.

The Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-generated Content was drawn up by independent experts in a multi-stakeholder process facilitated by the AI Office. It helps providers and deployers of generative AI systems to comply with the AI Act’s obligations for labelling and marking of AI-generated content – Article 50(2), (4) and (5) of the AI Act. Even though adherence to the code is voluntary, the transparency requirements under article 50 of the AI Act are legal obligations.

The Commission and the AI Board have confirmed that the code is an adequate voluntary tool to demonstrate compliance with the AI Act transparency obligations.

Below you can find further information about the code and its drawing up process.

Code of Practice
Drawing-up of the code

 

The Code of Practice on transparency of AI-generated content (PDF) has 2 sections:

Section 1: Providers - Rules for marking and detection of AI-generated and manipulated content
Section 2: Deployers - Rules for labelling of deepfakes and AI-generated and manipulated text

The EU has also created a set of icons that deployers of generative AI systems may use to label their AI-generated content.

The code is complemented by the guidelines on the scope of the transparency obligations laid down in Article 50 of the AI Act.

Following a positive assessment of the code, all providers and deployers who sign it can rely on its measures to demonstrate compliance with the AI Act’s rules for labeling and detection of AI-generated content, deepfakes and certain text publications. This will reduce their administrative burden and give them predictability, legal certainty and trust across all Member States. 

By contrast, providers and deployers that decide to comply through other means will have to demonstrate that those measures are adequate. This will be assessed individually by different market surveillance authorities. Signatories to the code will also collaborate in the Signatory Taskforces, which will be set up to share practices and advance the implementation of the marking and labelling.

The code promotes a consistent, practical and proportionate implementation of the AI Act’s transparency obligations. It does not replace the AI Act or the Commission’s guidelines on Article 50 AI Act. However, it provides an EU-wide recognised practical framework for signatories to demonstrate compliance with those obligations.

Providers and deployers of generative AI systems may sign up to the code. Find the Signatory Form and instructions and check the questions & answers about signing the code. By the end of July 2026, about 190 companies organisations have signed the code. Find the full list of signatories.

 

Quick Links
EU Icons for labelling AI-generated content
How to sign the Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-generated Content
Questions & answers - Signing the Code of Practice on transparency of AI-genera…
Questions & answers - Code of Practice on Transparency of AI-Generated Content
Guidelines on Transparency of AI-generated Content
Signatories of the code of practice
Related Content
Big Picture
European approach to artificial intelligence

The EU’s approach to artificial intelligence promotes excellence and trust, by boosting research and industrial capacity while ensuring safety and fundamental rights.

Dig deeper
EU Icons for labelling AI-generated content

Deployers of generative AI systems can use the EU set of icons to label certain AI-generated content...

Last update

31 July 2026

Print as PDF
Shaping Europe’s digital future
This site is managed by:
Directorate-General for Communications Networks, Content and Technology
Digital EU on Mastadon
Digital EU on LinkedIn
Digital EU on Facebook
Digital EU on Youtube
Digital EU on Instagram
Digital EU on X
About us
Privacy statement
Copyright notice
About Directorate-General CONNECT
Language Policy

Follow the European Commission

Mastodon
LinkedIn
Bluesky
Facebook
Youtube
Other
Contact us
Report an IT vulnerability
Languages on our websites
Cookies
Privacy policy
Legal notice
Accessibility