Skip to main content
Google DeepMind
SynthID
A tool to watermark and identify content generated through AI
Try in Gemini
Overview
How it works
Hands-on
What is SynthID?

Generative AI can help us all to be more creative, productive, and innovative. But it can be hard to tell the difference between content that’s been AI-generated, and content created without AI.

SynthID is our new watermarking tool, designed specifically for AI-generated content. It empowers users to identify AI-generated (or altered) content, helping to foster transparency and trust in generative AI.

How SynthID works

SynthID embeds digital watermarks directly into AI-generated images, audio, text or video. The watermarks are embedded across Google’s generative AI consumer products, and are imperceptible to humans – but can be detected by SynthID's technology.

Slide 1 of 3
Detecting SynthID watermarks in Gemini

Want to check if an image, video or audio clip was generated, or edited, by Google AI? Ask Gemini.

Simply upload the image, video or audio clip to your chat, and ask if it’s been created or altered by Google AI. Gemini will check for a SynthID watermark, and let you know if it finds one.

Try in Gemini
How to verify in Gemini
SynthID Detector

Earlier this year, we launched the SynthID Detector, a verification portal, to verify if a piece of content was watermarked with SynthID. Just upload an image, video or audio file.

We are currently collaborating with journalists and media professionals to test the portal and collect their feedback.

Join the early tester waitlist
Follow us
Sign up for updates on our latest innovations

I accept Google's Terms and Conditions and acknowledge that my information will be used in accordance with Google's Privacy Policy.

Sign up
Build AI responsibly to benefit humanity
Models
Gemini
Gemini Omni
Nano Banana
Gemini Audio
Gemma
Genie
Lyria
Veo
Research
Gemini Robotics
Breakthroughs
Evals
Publications
Frontier safety
Responsibility
Science
AlphaFold
AlphaGenome
WeatherNext
AlphaEarth
AlphaEvolve
Products
Gemini app
Google AI Studio
Google Antigravity
Learn more
About
News
Careers
National Partnerships for AI
Accelerator programs
The Podcast
DeepMind Institute
About Google
Google products
Privacy
Terms