 textGrain: Entropy-Calibrated Watermarking
             for Language Model Text

Technical report accompanying OpenAI’s October 5th blog post

         Xiang Li           Garrett Wen      Xiaohong Chen              Qi Long

University of Pennsylvania  Yale University   Yale University  University of Pennsylvania

Arzav Jain  Florent Joly    Mike Lam         Qingquan Song     Weijie Su∗

   OpenAI       OpenAI        OpenAI               OpenAI        OpenAI

                            October 5, 2026

                                                                Abstract

             This technical report provides the mathematical details of the textGrain watermark de-
        scribed in OpenAI’s October 5th blog post. It speciﬁes the generation and detection procedures,
        explains how to set a budget for the sampling entropy lost in exchange for a watermark sig-
        nal, and states the assumptions underlying the theoretical guarantees. The method couples
        token generation to keyed randomness through an optimal transport problem with costs based
        on Gumbel random variables and Kullback–Leibler (KL) regularization. The KL divergence
        from independence equals the reduction in conditional entropy, giving the watermark strength
        parameter a direct information-theoretic interpretation. To speed up computation, we apply
        transport to vocabulary blocks, reducing the optimization dimension while preserving relative
        token probabilities within each block. We analyze how to calibrate the watermark to a chosen
        entropy-loss budget. The detector requires only the generated text and the secret key and does
        not need to know the budget used during generation.

1 Introduction

This report is intended for readers of the accompanying blog post who want a precise account of
how textGrain works. It explains how generation creates dependence on keyed randomness, what
the entropy budget controls, and how the detector obtains statistical evidence from the text.

     A language model generates text one token at a time, sampling each token (a word or part
of a word) from a next token prediction (NTP) distribution determined by the preceding text.
Watermarking embeds a statistical signal by modifying this sampling using pseudorandom values
derived from a secret key and the preceding context (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023; Aaronson, 2023;
Dathathri et al., 2024). With the watermark conﬁguration speciﬁed, a detector uses the text and
key to reconstruct these values and tests for dependence between them and the observed tokens
(Li et al., 2025a).

     Preserving the NTP distribution provides one way to limit the eﬀect of watermarking on gen-
eration. A watermark is unbiased if, at any ﬁxed context, averaging its token distribution over

    ∗Correspondence to suw@openai.com.

                                                                1
a randomly drawn key recovers the original NTP distribution (Hu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a;
Dathathri et al., 2024). In practice, a key is often reused across responses. Unbiasedness alone does
not ensure that sampling remains random under that key. For example, Gumbel-max watermarking
selects the token with the largest sum of its log probability and a keyed Gumbel value; at a ﬁxed
context and key, it always selects the same token (Aaronson, 2023). Repeated generation from the
same prompt can therefore produce identical responses (Kuditipudi et al., 2024; He et al., 2025b).
This matters when an application needs several distinct answers or solutions to the same prompt.

    If tokens are independent of the keyed randomness, there is no watermark signal to detect. If
that randomness determines every token, no further sampling randomness remains. Entropy re-
duction measures the average sampling randomness removed between these extremes: it compares
the NTP entropy with the entropy that remains after conditioning on the keyed randomness. An
unbiased watermark deﬁnes a coupling, a joint distribution of the generated token and keyed ran-
domness with prescribed marginals (Li et al., 2025a; Xie et al., 2025; Long et al., 2025; Tsur et al.,
2025; He et al., 2025a; Gloaguen et al., 2026). The average entropy reduction is the mutual infor-
mation between these variables. Optimal transport (OT) provides a way to choose the coupling:
its cost favors selected forms of dependence, while KL regularization penalizes departure from in-
dependence. The KL penalty equals the average entropy reduction, so an entropy budget directly
limits the average sampling randomness that may be removed.

    textGrain applies OT to keyed blocks of vocabulary tokens. The coupling determines how the
selected block depends on the keyed randomness; within that block, tokens retain their original
relative probabilities. This reduces the optimization dimension and preserves unbiasedness when
the coupling has the required marginals. Section 2 develops the coupling and entropy formulation,
and Section 3 speciﬁes block generation and detection. The appendices give the numerical solver
and proofs (Appendix A), compatibility with speculative sampling (Appendix B), and connections
to related work (Appendix C).

2 Framework: watermarking as OT

Sampling and coupling. Given a token sequence w1:n over a vocabulary V, let Pt denote the
NTP distribution determined by the preﬁx w1:t−1. At position t, the watermark uses a pseudoran-
dom value Ξt derived from the secret key and a window of up to Lctx preceding tokens. For a single
position, we suppress t and write P , Ξ, and W for the NTP distribution, keyed randomness, and
sampled token. At a ﬁxed preﬁx, a randomly drawn key induces a distribution µ over Ξ. Averaging
over keys means averaging over Ξ ∼ µ; ﬁxing the keyed randomness means conditioning on Ξ.

    A watermark is unbiased if averaging its conditional token distribution over Ξ ∼ µ recovers
P . Thus the joint distribution of (W, Ξ) has marginals P and µ. We call this joint distribution a
coupling π and write Π(P , µ) for the set of all such couplings. Once Ξ = ξ is ﬁxed, the sampling
distribution is Q(· | ξ) = π(· | Ξ = ξ). Unwatermarked sampling corresponds to the independent
coupling P ⊗ µ, for which Q(· | ξ) = P for every ξ (Li et al., 2025a). A watermark makes Q(· | ξ)
depend on ξ while preserving its average over µ.

Regularized OT. OT selects a coupling by minimizing its expected cost subject to ﬁxed
marginals (Peyré and Cuturi, 2019). We assign each token and randomness pair a cost c(w, ξ),
with smaller values for pairs favored by the watermark. To limit dependence, we penalize departure

                                                                2
from the independent coupling using the KL divergence (Kullback and Leibler, 1951; Cover and

Thomas, 2006),

                DKL(π∥P ⊗ µ) =  log    dπ        dπ.

                                       d(P ⊗ µ)

All logarithms are natural. With regularization strength λ > 0, we choose

                πλ ∈ arg min {Eπc(W, Ξ) + λDKL(π∥P ⊗ µ)} .                 (1)

                π∈Π(P ,µ)

The cost favors the selected dependence, while the KL penalty limits it. The marginal constraints
preserve the NTP distribution after averaging over keys.

Information and entropy. The coupling determines how much sampling randomness remains
when the keyed randomness is ﬁxed. The NTP entropy is H(P ) = − w∈V Pw log Pw, with 0 log 0 =
0. Given Ξ = ξ, the remaining sampling entropy is H{Q(· | ξ)}. Averaging this quantity over Ξ
gives the conditional entropy Hπ(W | Ξ). For any coupling with marginals P and µ (Cover and
Thomas, 2006),

                             DKL(π∥P ⊗ µ) = Iπ(W ; Ξ) = H(P ) − EΞH{Q(· | Ξ)}.

The KL penalty is therefore exactly the average entropy removed by watermarking. This identity
concerns an average over the keyed randomness; it does not impose the same entropy loss for every
ﬁxed key.

3 textGrain: watermarking with block OT

3.1 Watermark embedding

We apply OT to blocks of tokens to reduce the optimization dimension while retaining relative token
probabilities within each block. An entropy budget limits the average loss of sampling entropy to
a fraction β ∈ [0, 1] of the NTP entropy. Figure 1 illustrates the construction: partition the
vocabulary, construct a coupling under the budget, then sample a block and a token. Algorithm 1
summarizes one generation step.

Vocabulary blocks. Let P be the NTP distribution after any temperature scaling or top-p
truncation (Holtzman et al., 2020), and let A = {w : Pw > 0} be its support. For a chosen number
of blocks B, write [B] = {1, . . . , B}. A keyed partition g : V → [B] assigns each token to a block.
The partition depends only on the key and context window, so the detector can reconstruct it
without access to P . The block probabilities are

                Pbblk =                Pw, b ∈ [B].                        (2)

                           w∈A:g(w)=b

Coupling under an entropy budget. We couple the block distribution P blk to m equally likely
columns. A coupling π assigns probability π(b, j) to the pair (b, j), with row sums P blk b and column
sums 1/m. Selecting a column uniformly and then sampling a block conditional on that column
therefore recovers P blk on average.

    For each pair (b, j), the key and context window generate a standard Gumbel variab√le Zbj with
distribution function FG(z) = exp{− exp(−z)}. We standardize it as Gbj = (Zbj−γ)/(π/ 6), where

                                                                3
a Vocabulary blocks                             b Entropy-constrained OT                        c Token sampling

          Prefix                        Context window +       Key
The morning was ___

Token distribution        Keyed blocks
                         warm 0.40
warm      0.30           calm                      Cost table                  Selected column
                         cold 0.35
cold      0.25           sunny                                   Sinkhorn +                     Block probabilities   Within a block  Next token
                         mild 0.25                             budget update                                    0.04        cold          cold
mild      0.15           bright                                                                                 0.69
                                                                                                                0.27       sunny
calm      0.10

sunny     0.10

bright    0.10

Figure 1: Embedding a watermark with block OT. a, The key and context window divide
the vocabulary into blocks; each block receives the sum of its tokens’ NTP probabilities. Colors
distinguish the three blocks in this example. b, OT couples these probabilities to four equally likely
columns, favoring pairs with smaller costs subject to the entropy budget. The cost table assigns
a pseudorandom cost to each pair of a block and a column; darker cells indicate smaller costs.
Circle areas show the coupling probabilities. c, The key and context window select a column. Its
normalized entries determine the block probabilities; a token is then sampled within the selected
block using the original relative probabilities. The blue tokens illustrate a context window of two
tokens, whereas the model uses the full preﬁx. Displayed probabilities are rounded.

Algorithm 1 Embedding a watermark with block OT and an entropy budget
Require: NTP distribution P , secret key, context window, block count B, column count m, and

     target entropy loss fraction β
 1: Construct the keyed partition g
 2: Aggregate the block probabilities using (2)
 3: Generate the cost table c(b, j) = −Gbj from standardized Gumbel variables
 4: Compute a coupling with the prescribed marginals, targeting loss βH(P ) using Algorithm A.1;

     retain its achieved loss and convergence status
 5: Select the keyed column J, then sample a block and token using (5)

γ is the Euler–Mascheroni constant and π here is the mathematical constant. Set c(b, j) = −Gbj, so
minimizing cost favors larger Gumbel values. In the idealized construction, the Zbj are independent
and identically distributed, and the random draws used for the partition, cost table, and selected

column are independent at a ﬁxed context. Distinct contexts use independent draws. These

assumptions model the keyed pseudorandom functions; repeated contexts reuse the same values.

    Let um = (1/m, . . . , 1/m). Because relative probabilities within each block are unchanged, the
KL divergence from P blk ⊗ um equals the average loss of NTP entropy across columns. The ideal
budgeted problem is

                            Bm

                    min                 π(b, j)c(b, j) subject to DKL π P blk ⊗ um ≤ βH(P ).                                          (3)
          π∈Π(P b=1 blk,um) j=1

Introducing a nonnegative multiplier for the constraint gives the regularized objective. For λ > 0,

we write                                                                                                             

                                                B m                                                                  
                                                               π(b, j)c(b, j) + λDKL π P blk ⊗ um .
                     πλ ∈ arg min                                                                                                   (4)

                         π  ∈Π(P  blk   ,um  )     b=1  j  =1

                                                               4
Here β bounds the allowed entropy loss, while λ penalizes dependence in the objective. Increasing
β permits more entropy loss; increasing λ cannot increase the loss at an exact optimum (Proposi-
tion A.1). A zero budget gives the independent coupling. Positive budgets need not be attained
exactly, because the largest attainable loss depends on the block and column marginals.

    The numerical solver alternates coupling updates with adjustments to λ. It restores the pre-
scribed marginals before sampling and reports the achieved entropy loss. A ﬁnite iteration limit or
numerical tolerance can leave that loss above or below the target, so the requested budget alone is
not a guarantee for the numerical output. Appendix A.1 describes the procedure, and Theorem A.3
gives a conditional convergence bound.

Token sampling. The key selects a column J that is uniform conditional on the partition and
cost table in the idealized construction. For any coupling π with the prescribed marginals, the
conditional block probability is r(b | j) = mπ(b, j). Sampling within the chosen block according to
the original relative probabilities gives

   Pw
Q(w | j) = mπ{g(w), j} blk , w ∈ A,  (5)
   Pg(w)

with Q(w | j) = 0 outside A. The denominator is positive for w ∈ A. This formula applies to both
exact OT solutions and numerically computed couplings after marginal correction.

    For a ﬁxed partition and cost table, averaging over J recovers the NTP distribution:
m−1 j Q(w | j) = Pw. Moreover,

                                1 H{Q(· | j)} = H(P ) − DKL π P blk m ⊗ um .
                               m j=1

A coupling satisfying (3) thus retains at least a fraction 1 − β of NTP entropy on average across
columns. This is not a lower bound for every column. Preservation of the entire sequence distribu-
tion additionally requires conditional uniformity at each generation step, as stated in Theorem A.4.

Compatibility with speculative sampling. textGrain can be combined with speculative sam-
pling while the draft and target models share a secret key (Leviathan et al., 2023; Chen et al.,
2023). The draft proposes tokens, and the target evaluates the proposals in parallel. Veriﬁcation
uses the two watermarked conditional distributions to preserve the target’s watermarked output
law. Appendix B gives the algorithm and its assumptions. The resulting speed depends on proposal
acceptance and the cost of watermarking both models; distributional equivalence alone does not
establish a speedup.

3.2 Watermark detection

Reconstructing the scores. The coupling favors pairs of blocks and columns with smaller costs,
so detection tests whether observed tokens tend to occupy such pairs (Figure 2). The textGrain
detector uses the same tokenizer, block and column counts, context-window rule, and keyed pseudo-
random construction as generation. At each scored position, the key and observed context window
reconstruct the partition, cost table, and selected column. The token identiﬁes its block and hence
the relevant cost. Reconstruction requires neither the coupling nor the generating model or entropy
budget.

5
a Identify token block                 b Recover token score     c Test for watermark

                                       Context window +  Key

     Context window      Keyed blocks  Cost table          Selected column

The morning was         warm                                                   Each scored position  Test statistic  Null distribution
cold and bright.        calm                                          Transformed                                              Observed value
                                                                                                        Σ Yt
                        cold                                               score
                        sunny
                                                         Transform
                        mild
                        bright                                      Y4

                                                                 Y1, Y2, …, Yn

                                       Selected entry

Figure 2: Detecting the watermark from the observed text. a, The detector identiﬁes the
block containing the observed token. As in Figure 1, blue text marks a context window of two
tokens. b, The context window and key reconstruct the cost table and selected column (black
outline). The cost for the observed block (jade outline) is transformed into the score Y4 for the
fourth illustrated token, cold. c, Repeating this procedure at the scored positions yields Y1, . . . , Yn.
Their sum is compared with its distribution under unwatermarked text to test for a watermark.

Detection statistic and calibration. Let ct be the reconstructed√cost at scored position t.
Undoing standardization gives the original Gumbel value Zt = γ − (π/ 6)ct. We deﬁne

                                       Yt = − log{1 − FG(Zt)},              n

                                                                 Sn = Yt,

                                                                           t=1

where n is the number of scored positions. Smaller costs yield larger scores and therefore larger
values of Sn.

    For the idealized null calculation, assume the unwatermarked text is independent of the secret
key and that the independence conditions for the partition, cost table, and column hold. Conditional
on the text, each reconstructed Zt is then a standard Gumbel variable, so Yt has the unit exponential
distribution. To avoid reusing the same table, score only the ﬁrst occurrence of each distinct
context window. Under the assumed independence across distinct contexts, the resulting scores are
independent and Sn ∼ Gamma(n, 1), with shape n and scale 1. For n ≥ 1, we declare a watermark
when Sn exceeds this distribution’s (1 − α) quantile. The conditional false positive rate is α under
these assumptions; with no scored positions, the test makes no detection.

    Ignoring repeated contexts during detection does not enforce the conditional uniformity needed
for sequence preservation in Theorem A.4. One way to obtain that property is to sample directly
from the NTP distribution at contexts already used during generation. A ﬁxed deployed key and
ﬁnite precision arithmetic require empirical calibration checks; the idealized null calculation does
not by itself guarantee the same error rate for every key or application.

References

Scott Aaronson. Watermarking of large language models. https://simons.berkeley.edu/talks/
   scott-aaronson-ut-austin-openai-2023-08-17, August 2023.

Jason Altschuler, Jonathan Niles-Weed, and Philippe Rigollet. Near-linear time approximation
   algorithms for optimal transport via sinkhorn iteration. In Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017.

                                                              6
Mikhail J Atallah, Victor Raskin, Michael Crogan, Christian Hempelmann, Florian Kerschbaum,
   Dina Mohamed, and Sanket Naik. Natural language watermarking: Design, analysis, and a
   proof-of-concept implementation. In Information Hiding, pages 185–200, 2001.

Jose H. Blanchet, T. Tony Cai, Xiang Li, Hao Liu, Qi Long, and Weijie J. Su. Optimal watermark
   localization in mixed-source large language model texts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.14906, 2026.

T Tony Cai, Xiang Li, Qi Long, Weijie J Su, and Garrett G Wen. Optimal detection for language
  watermarks with pseudorandom collision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.22007, 2025.

Zhongze Cai, Shang Liu, Hanzhao Wang, Huaiyang Zhong, and Xiaocheng Li. Towards better
   statistical understanding of watermarking LLMs. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  121(553):247–258, 2026. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2026.2618290.

Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoﬀrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
  Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling. arXiv preprint
  arXiv:2302.01318, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2302.01318.

Ruibo Chen, Yihan Wu, Junfeng Guo, and Heng Huang. Improved unbiased watermark for large
   language models. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
   putational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 20587–20601, Vienna, Austria, July
  2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.1005. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.1005/.

Xuyang Chen, Xiang Li, Yangxinyu Xie, and Qi Long. Selective disclosure watermarking for large
   language models. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning, 2026.

Miranda Christ and Sam Gunn. Pseudorandom error-correcting codes. In Annual International
  Cryptology Conference, pages 325–347. Springer, 2024.

Miranda Christ, Sam Gunn, and Or Zamir. Undetectable watermarks for language models. In
  Conference on Learning Theory, pages 1125–1139. PMLR, 2024.

Thomas M. Cover and Joy A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory. Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd
   edition, 2006.

Marco Cuturi. Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. In Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013.

Amirhossein Dabiriaghdam and Lele Wang. SimMark: A robust sentence-level similarity-based
  watermarking algorithm for large language models. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on
  Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 30785–30806, Suzhou, China, 2025.
  Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.1567. URL
   https://aclanthology.org/2025.emnlp-main.1567/.

Sumanth Dathathri, Abigail See, Sumedh Ghaisas, Po-Sen Huang, Rob McAdam, Johannes Welbl,
  Vandana Bachani, Alex Kaskasoli, Robert Stanforth, Tatiana Matejovicova, et al. Scalable wa-
   termarking for identifying large language model outputs. Nature, 634(8035):818–823, 2024. doi:
  10.1038/s41586-024-08025-4.

Pierre Fernandez, Antoine Chaﬃn, Karim Tit, Vivien Chappelier, and Teddy Furon. Three bricks
   to consolidate watermarks for large language models. In 2023 IEEE International Workshop on
  Information Forensics and Security (WIFS), pages 91–99. IEEE, 2023.

                                                                7
Jiayi Fu, Xuandong Zhao, Ruihan Yang, Yuansen Zhang, Jiangjie Chen, and Yanghua Xiao. Gum-
   belSoft: Diversiﬁed language model watermarking via the GumbelMax-trick. In Proceedings of the
  62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
   pages 5791–5808, Bangkok, Thailand, August 2024. Association for Computational Linguistics.
   doi: 10.18653/v1/2024.acl-long.315.

Thibaud Gloaguen, Robin Staab, Nikola Jovanović, and Martin Vechev. A uniﬁed framework for
   LLM watermarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.06754, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.
   06754.

Noah Golowich and Ankur Moitra. Edit distance robust watermarks via indexing pseudorandom
   codes. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 37, 2024. doi: 10.52202/
   079017-0652.

Haiyun He, Yepeng Liu, Ziqiao Wang, Yongyi Mao, and Yuheng Bu. Theoretically grounded frame-
  work for LLM watermarking: A distribution-adaptive approach. Advances in Neural Information
  Processing Systems, 38:114528–114564, 2025a.

Weiqing He, Xiang Li, Tianqi Shang, Li Shen, Weijie J. Su, and Qi Long. On the empirical power
   of goodness-of-ﬁt tests in watermark detection. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
  Systems, volume 38, 2025b.

Ari Holtzman, Jan Buys, Li Du, Maxwell Forbes, and Yejin Choi. The curious case of neural text
   degeneration. In International Conference on Learning Representations, 2020.

Abe Hou, Jingyu Zhang, Tianxing He, Yichen Wang, Yung-Sung Chuang, Hongwei Wang, Lingfeng
   Shen, Benjamin Van Durme, Daniel Khashabi, and Yulia Tsvetkov. SemStamp: A semantic
  watermark with paraphrastic robustness for text generation. In North American Chapter of
  the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, volume 1, pages
  4067–4082, 2024.

Zhengmian Hu, Lichang Chen, Xidong Wu, Yihan Wu, Hongyang Zhang, and Heng Huang. Unbi-
   ased watermark for large language models. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
  tations, 2024.

Baihe Huang, Banghua Zhu, Hanlin Zhu, Jason Lee, Jiantao Jiao, and Michael Jordan. Towards
   optimal statistical watermarking. In Socially Responsible Language Modelling Research, 2023.
   URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=Fc2FaS9mYJ.

Baihe Huang, Eric Xu, Kannan Ramchandran, Jiantao Jiao, and Michael I Jordan. Towards
   anytime-valid statistical watermarking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.17608, 2026.

Mingjia Huo, Sai Ashish Somayajula, Youwei Liang, Ruisi Zhang, Farinaz Koushanfar, and Pengtao
  Xie. Token-speciﬁc watermarking with enhanced detectability and semantic coherence for large
   language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Jonathan Katz, Ian Miers, and Tom Goldstein. A
  watermark for large language models. In International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
  202, pages 17061–17084, 2023.

                                                                8
John Kirchenbauer, Jonas Geiping, Yuxin Wen, Manli Shu, Khalid Saifullah, Kezhi Kong, Kasun
   Fernando, Aniruddha Saha, Micah Goldblum, and Tom Goldstein. On the reliability of wa-
   termarks for large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.

Kalpesh Krishna, Yixiao Song, Marzena Karpinska, John Wieting, and Mohit Iyyer. Paraphrasing
   evades detectors of AI-generated text, but retrieval is an eﬀective defense. In Advances in Neural
  Information Processing Systems, volume 36, 2023.

Rohith Kuditipudi, John Thickstun, Tatsunori Hashimoto, and Percy Liang. Robust distortion-
   free watermarks for language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024. ISSN
  2835-8856. URL https://openreview.net/forum?id=FpaCL1MO2C.

S. Kullback and R. A. Leibler. On information and suﬃciency. The Annals of Mathematical
  Statistics, 22(1):79–86, 1951. doi: 10.1214/aoms/1177729694.

Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via specu-
   lative decoding. In Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, vol-
   ume 202 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023. URL
   https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/leviathan23a.html.

Xiang Li, Feng Ruan, Huiyuan Wang, Qi Long, and Weijie J Su. A statistical framework of
  watermarks for large language models: Pivot, detection eﬃciency and optimal rules. The Annals
  of Statistics, 53(1):322–351, 2025a. doi: 10.1214/24-AOS2468.

Xiang Li, Garrett Wen, Weiqing He, Jiayuan Wu, Qi Long, and Weijie J. Su. Optimal estimation
   of watermark proportions in hybrid AI-human texts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.22343, 2025b.

Xiang Li, Feng Ruan, Huiyuan Wang, Qi Long, and Weijie J. Su. Robust detection of watermarks
   for large language models under human edits. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B:
  Statistical Methodology, 88(2):491–515, 2026. doi: 10.1093/jrsssb/qkaf056.

Xingchi Li, Guanxun Li, and Xianyang Zhang. Segmenting watermarked texts from language
   models. In Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Aiwei Liu, Leyi Pan, Xuming Hu, Shiao Meng, and Lijie Wen. A semantic invariant robust wa-
   termark for large language models. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.

Yepeng Liu and Yuheng Bu. Adaptive text watermark for large language models. In International
  Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

Carol Xuan Long, Dor Tsur, Claudio Mayrink Verdun, Hsiang Hsu, Haim Permuter, and
   Flavio P Calmon. Optimized couplings for watermarking large language models. In 2025
  IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), pages 1–6. IEEE, 2025. doi:
  10.1109/ISIT63088.2025.11195457.

Alexander Nemecek, Yuzhou Jiang, and Erman Ayday. Topic-based watermarks for large lan-
   guage models. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026, pages
  24372–24402, San Diego, California, United States, 2026. Association for Computational Lin-
   guistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2026.ﬁndings-acl.1220. URL https://aclanthology.org/2026.
   findings-acl.1220/.

                                                                9
Leyi Pan, Aiwei Liu, Yijian Lu, Zitian Gao, Yichen Di, Lijie Wen, Irwin King, and Philip S.
  Yu. WaterSeeker: Pioneering eﬃcient detection of watermarked segments in large documents.
   In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages 2866–2882,
  Albuquerque, New Mexico, April 2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/
  v1/2025.ﬁndings-naacl.156. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.findings-naacl.156/.

Gabriel Peyré and Marco Cuturi. Computational optimal transport: With applications to data
   science. Foundations and Trends® in Machine Learning, 11(5-6):355–607, 2019. doi: 10.1561/
  2200000073.

Tom Sander, Hongyan Chang, Sylvestre-Alvise Rebuﬃ, Tomáš Souček, Tuan Tran, Valeriu Laca-
   tusu, Alexandre Mourachko, Surya Parimi, Christophe Ropers, Rashel Moritz, Vanessa Stark,
   Hady Elsahar, and Pierre Fernandez. TextSeal: A localized LLM watermark for provenance
   & distillation protection. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.12456v2, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/
   abs/2605.12456v2.

Bernhard Schmitzer. Stabilized sparse scaling algorithms for entropy regularized transport problems.
  SIAM Journal on Scientiﬁc Computing, 41(3):A1443–A1481, 2019. doi: 10.1137/16M1106018.

Ziteng Sun, Uri Mendlovic, Yaniv Leviathan, Asaf Aharoni, Jae Hun Ro, Ahmad Beirami, and
  Ananda Theertha Suresh. Block veriﬁcation accelerates speculative decoding. In International
  Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.

Umut Topkara, Mercan Topkara, and Mikhail J Atallah. The hiding virtues of ambiguity: Quan-
   tiﬁably resilient watermarking of natural language text through synonym substitutions. In Pro-
  ceedings of the 8th workshop on Multimedia and security, pages 164–174, 2006.

Dor Tsur, Carol Long, Claudio Mayrink Verdun, Sajani Vithana, Hsiang Hsu, Richard Chen, Haim
   Permuter, and Flavio Calmon. HeavyWater and SimplexWater: Distortion-free LLM watermarks
   for low-entropy distributions. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 38,
   pages 118653–118705. Curran Associates, Inc., 2025. doi: 10.52202/085713-3575.

Yihan Wu, Zhengmian Hu, Junfeng Guo, Hongyang Zhang, and Heng Huang. A resilient and
   accessible distribution-preserving watermark for large language models. In Proceedings of the 41st
  International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning
  Research, pages 53443–53470, 2024.

Yangxinyu Xie, Xiang Li, Tanwi Mallick, Weijie Su, and Ruixun Zhang. Debiasing watermarks for
   large language models via maximal coupling. Journal of the American Statistical Association,
  120(551):1424–1436, 2025. doi: 10.1080/01621459.2025.2520455.

Jiahao Xu, Rui Hu, Olivera Kotevska, and Zikai Zhang. XMark: Reliable multi-bit watermarking
   for LLM-generated texts. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for
  Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 14747–14763, San Diego, California,
   United States, 2026. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2026.acl-long.
   672. URL https://aclanthology.org/2026.acl-long.672/.

KiYoon Yoo, Wonhyuk Ahn, Jiho Jang, and Nojun Kwak. Robust multi-bit natural language water-
   marking through invariant features. In Annual Meeting Of The Association For Computational
  Linguistics, 2023.

                                                               10
Hanlin Zhang, Benjamin L Edelman, Danilo Francati, Daniele Venturi, Giuseppe Ateniese, and
   Boaz Barak. Watermarks in the sand: Impossibility of strong watermarking for language mod-
   els. In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, volume 235 of
  Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 58851–58880. PMLR, 2024.

Xuandong Zhao, Prabhanjan Vijendra Ananth, Lei Li, and Yu-Xiang Wang. Provable robust
  watermarking for AI-generated text. In International Conference on Learning Representations,
  2024.

Xuandong Zhao, Chenwen Liao, Yu-Xiang Wang, and Lei Li. Eﬃciently identifying watermarked
   segments in mixed-source texts. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association
   for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6304–6316, Vienna, Austria, July
  2025. Association for Computational Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.316.

A Block OT with entropy calibration: solver and guarantees

A.1 Solving the OT problem under an entropy constraint

We solve the OT problem with KL regularization in (4) while adjusting λ towards the target
entropy loss. The method alternates between updating the coupling and adjusting λ according to
the achieved loss. Throughout this appendix, ρ = P blk denotes the block distribution, um the
uniform column distribution, and c(b, j) = −Gbj. For λ > 0 and a ﬁnite cost table, the equivalent
maximization problem is

πλ ∈ arg max {⟨π, G⟩ − λDKL(π∥ρ ⊗ um)} .                    (A.1)

         π∈Π(ρ,um)

Algorithm A.1 gives the procedure for one token position.

Initialization and Sinkhorn updates. Line 1 excludes blocks with zero mass before the it-
erations. A zero target or zero block entropy gives the independent coupling. In particular, the
algorithm returns before dividing by H(P ) when this entropy is zero. Otherwise, line 5 caps the
requested loss at min{H(ρ), log m} and, relative to block entropy, at 1 − 10−8. These caps follow
from the information bound in Theorem A.4. They can reduce the requested target, but do not
guarantee that the remaining target is attainable for the given marginals, cost table and interval
of λ.

    For ﬁxed λ > 0, the matrix Kλ(b, j) = exp{−c(b, j)/λ} gives the solution the form πλ =
diag(u)Kλ diag(v). The row and column scaling vectors u, v enforce the prescribed marginals
through alternating Sinkhorn updates (Cuturi, 2013). Lines 11–14 perform these updates and nor-
malize each column to mass 1/m. Evaluating them in the log domain using log-sum-exp avoids
forming very large or small kernel entries explicitly. Any probability ﬂoor used when taking log-
arithms is a numerical modiﬁcation of the update. Line 12 subtracts the mean of log v. The
subsequent row update cancels this rescaling, leaving the coupling unchanged in exact arithmetic.

Marginal correction. After these updates, a ﬁnite iterate may still have incorrect row sums.
Line 15 restores both prescribed marginals by scaling down rows and columns with excess mass,
then redistributing the missing mass to ﬁll both sets of deﬁcits. We denote this operation by R
and its input table by X.

11
Algorithm A.1 Alternating updates of the block coupling and regularization

Require: Block probabilities P blk, cost table c, NTP entropy H(P ) and target β ∈ [0, 1]

1: Remove blocks with zero mass and the corresponding rows of c
2: if β = 0 or H(P blk) = 0 then
3: return P blk ⊗ um, zero entropy loss and status “independent coupling”

4: end if
5: β ← min β, (1 − 10−8)H(P blk)/H(P ), log m/H(P )

6: If β = 0, return the independent coupling with zero entropy loss

7: Set λ = 1, v = um, a = 1/2, λmin = 10−2, λmax = 102
8: Set δ = 10−12H(P blk)/H(P ), tolerance εI and iteration limit Nit ≥ 1

9: for s = 0, . . . , Nit − 1 do

10: Form log Kλ = [−c(b, j)/λ]bj                        ▷ Evaluate updates in the log domain
11: u ← P blk/(Kλv); v ← um/(Kλ⊤u)                         ▷ Update row, then column factors
12: log v ← log v − m−1(1⊤ log v)1                                  ▷ Center the column factors
                                                                             ▷ Refresh row factors
13: u ← P blk/(Kλv)

14: Rescale each column of diag(u)Kλ independently to sum to 1/m, giving πs

15: πs ← R(πs) using (A.2)                                              ▷ Restore both marginals

16: Compute the fraction of entropy removed, βs, using (A.3)

17: if |βs − β| ≤ εI or s = Nit − 1 then

18:  return πs, βs and whether |βs − β| ≤ εI

19: end if a                                                               ▷ Adjust entropy loss
20: λnew ← clip[λmin,λmax] λ max(βs, δ)/β

21: Rescale v ← exp{(λ/λnew) log v}; then set λ ← λnew

22: end for

    Let X ≥ 0 have total mass one, with prescribed row and column marginals a = ρ and b = um.
The vectors x and y below contain the row and column scaling factors. Each factor is at most one,
so these steps only remove excess mass:

             X′ = diag(x)X,                    xi = min ai , 1 ,
             X′′ = X′ diag(y),                               (X 1)i

                                               yj = min                 bj
                                                                        ′ ⊤ ,1 .
                                                         ((X ) 1)j

If a denominator is zero, set the corresponding scale to one. The remaining marginal deﬁcits
ea = a−X′′1 and eb = b−(X′′)⊤1 are nonnegative and have the same total mass ∆ = 1⊤ea = 1⊤eb.
Distributing this missing mass according to the two deﬁcit vectors gives the corrected coupling

                                                X′′ + eae⊤b /∆, ∆ > 0,                     (A.2)
                                  R(X) = ′′
                                  X,                    ∆ = 0.

It is nonnegative and satisﬁes R(X)1 = a and R(X)⊤1 = b. Moreover,
                                 ∥R(X) − X∥1 ≤ 2 ∥X1 − a∥1 + ∥X⊤1 − b∥1 ,

because scaling down the rows and columns removes at most their excess mass, and the rank-one
update ﬁlls the remaining deﬁcit (Altschuler et al., 2017, Algorithm 2 and Lemma 7). Thus vanish-
ing marginal residuals imply a vanishing correction. Convergence to the OT optimum additionally

                                           12
requires convergence of the underlying iterates. At iteration s, applying this correction to the cur-
rent transport table gives the coupling πs used in Algorithm A.1. Entropy loss is evaluated on this
corrected table. Both marginal residuals should also be checked in ﬂoating point arithmetic.

Entropy loss and regularization updates. Line 16 measures the fraction of entropy removed

by the corrected coupling,

                            βs =  DKL πs P blk ⊗ um               (A.3)
                                                    .
                                  H(P )

The same calculation can be performed by dividing the KL divergence by block entropy H(ρ) and
rescaling the target and tolerance by H(P )/H(ρ). Rescaling all three quantities together preserves
both the stopping test and the ratio of achieved loss to target loss used to update λ. The reported
fraction uses the NTP entropy normalization above.

    Line 20 increases λ when the loss exceeds the target and decreases it when the loss is too small.
The exponent a = 1/2 moderates the adjustment, while the ﬂoor δ and clipping bounds keep it well
deﬁned. When normalizing by block entropy, the ﬂoor is 10−12, equivalent to δ = 10−12H(ρ)/H(P )
in the algorithm. Line 21 multiplies log v by λold/λnew, preserving λ log v so that the next Sinkhorn
step reuses the current factors. The algorithm applies marginal correction before sampling and
returns the corrected coupling, achieved loss and convergence status. Active numerical ﬂoors and
bounds can aﬀect its output.

    Marginal correction enforces the prescribed marginals, but does not enforce the entropy budget.
Even when the stopping test succeeds, the achieved fraction can be as large as β + εI ; after Nit
iterations, it can diﬀer by more. The entropy identity therefore applies with the achieved fraction
βs. A strict budget claim requires checking βs ≤ β separately. Both the original request and any
capped target should be reported with the achieved loss and convergence status.

Batching and computational cost. Once several NTP distributions are available, their OT
problems can be solved in parallel by stacking the cost tables and scaling vectors. Each prob-
lem keeps its own λ, target entropy loss and stopping criterion. Problems that reach tolerance
stop updating while the others continue. Tables with diﬀerent numbers of blocks are padded, and
padded rows are excluded from the updates. This combines independent solves into shared matrix
operations without changing their results, apart from ﬂoating point error. It does not remove the
sequential dependence needed to obtain NTP distributions during ordinary autoregressive genera-
tion.

    Each Sinkhorn update and marginal correction requires O(Bm) operations. Aggregating the
active vocabulary and performing Nit updates therefore costs O(|A| + NitBm), where A is the
active support.

A.2 Calibrating entropy loss

We adjust λ to bring the achieved entropy loss towards its target. The KL divergence of the
exact coupling from independence equals the mutual information between block and column. It
also equals the average token entropy lost across columns. For H(P ) > 0, write θ = log λ and let
βeﬀ (θ) = DKL(πeθ ∥ρ ⊗ um) /H(P ) be the fraction of entropy removed by the exact OT solution. A
ﬁnite number of Sinkhorn steps and marginal correction give the approximation βs. For a positive
target, the update in line 20 is then

                            θs+1 = projΘ θs + a log βs ,          (A.4)
                                                               β

                                  13
where a is the step size and Θ = [log λmin, log λmax] is the permitted interval for log λ. This ex-
pression applies when the numerical ﬂoor is inactive, with β denoting the target after any cap.
Normalizing by block or token entropy gives the same ratio in the update. The solver uses matrix
scaling (Cuturi, 2013), stabilization in the log domain (Schmitzer, 2019) and marginal correction
(Altschuler et al., 2017), together with the update in (A.4). Rescaling the stored factors lets succes-
sive updates reuse the current solution. The direction of the update follows from a simple property:
increasing λ cannot increase the KL divergence of the optimal coupling from independence.

Proposition A.1 (Monotonicity of the KL divergence). For a ﬁxed ﬁnite cost table and marginals
restricted to their positive support, (A.1) has a unique optimizer for each λ > 0. Its KL divergence
DKL(πλ∥ρ ⊗ um) is nonincreasing in λ. It is strictly decreasing between any two values of λ whose
optimal couplings diﬀer. Hence a target KL divergence determines at most one λ on every strictly
decreasing portion of the path.

Proof of Proposition A.1. The feasible set is compact, and the objective is continuous and strictly
concave for λ > 0, giving existence and uniqueness. For 0 < λ1 < λ2, write πi = πλi, Si = ⟨πi, G⟩,
and Di = DKL(πi∥ρ ⊗ um). Optimality gives S1 − λ1D1 ≥ S2 − λ1D2 and S2 − λ2D2 ≥ S1 − λ2D1.
Adding yields (λ2 − λ1)(D1 − D2) ≥ 0, hence D1 ≥ D2. If D1 = D2, the two inequalities force
S1 = S2, so π2 is also optimal at λ1. Uniqueness then gives π1 = π2. Hence D1 > D2 whenever
the optimal couplings diﬀer.

     The update increases λ when entropy loss exceeds the target and decreases it when the loss is
too small. Its convergence rate depends on how strongly the loss responds to changes in λ. We
measure this response by ν(θ) := − d log βeﬀ(θ)/ dθ. For example, ν ≈ 2 means that a small 1%
increase in λ reduces the fraction of entropy removed by about 2%. The following condition rules
out a response that is too ﬂat or too steep for the chosen step size.

Assumption A.2 (Regularity of the response to regularization). The exact fraction βeﬀ(θ) is
positive and continuously diﬀerentiable on a closed interval Θ containing the initial iterate θ0 and
a solution θ⋆ of βeﬀ (θ⋆) = β. Its relative sensitivity ν(θ) and the step size a > 0 satisfy

                  0 < ν ≤ ν(θ) ≤ ν < ∞ (θ ∈ Θ), q := max{|1 − aν|, |1 − aν|} < 1.

The estimate after marginal correction is positive and satisﬁes log βs = log βeﬀ (θs) + es, where es
is the error caused by the approximate OT solution, measured on the logarithmic scale.

     This assumption requires an attainable target and quantitative bounds on the response through-
out the chosen interval. Monotonicity alone does not imply these bounds. We use a = 1/2 to damp
the update; the following convergence guarantee applies only when the stated sensitivity and ap-
proximation conditions hold.

Theorem A.3 (Convergence of the regularization update). Under Assumption A.2, the iterates
in (A.4) satisfy

                                                                                                    s−1

                                       |θs − θ⋆| ≤ qs|θ0 − θ⋆| + a qs−1−j|ej|.

                                                                                                    j=0

Thus exact OT solutions (es = 0) give geometric convergence with contraction factor q. Uniformly
bounded approximation errors limit the guaranteed accuracy, while errors |ej| = O(rj), 0 < r < 1,
contribute O(max{q, r}s) when r̸ = q and O(sqs−1) when r = q.

                                                               14
Proof of Theorem A.3. Put ϕ(θ) = log βeﬀ (θ) − log β. Then ϕ(θ⋆) = 0 and ϕ′(θ) = −ν(θ). Before
projection, the mean value theorem gives θs + aϕ(θs) − θ⋆ = {1 − aν(ξs)}(θs − θ⋆) for some ξs
between θs and θ⋆. Projection onto an interval containing θ⋆ is nonexpansive, so Assumption A.2
gives a contraction at each step with the additional perturbation aes. Iterating this bound proves
the result.

    This bound separates two sources of error: the initial choice of λ and the inaccuracy of each
OT solution. The ﬁrst decays geometrically. The second accumulates with decreasing weights, so
accurate calibration also requires suﬃciently accurate Sinkhorn iterates. The theorem does not
establish convergence of a ﬁxed number of alternating updates without control of the errors es.

    Near the largest attainable entropy loss, changing λ may have little eﬀect on the coupling. Then
ν can approach zero and convergence can slow. The achieved loss should therefore be reported
alongside the requested target. At a ﬁxed λ, a large cost range relative to λ makes the entries
of Kλ = exp(G/λ) more uneven and can slow Sinkhorn convergence (Peyré and Cuturi, 2019).
Reusing the previous scaling factors provides a nearby starting point when successive values of λ
are close and the solution varies smoothly.

A.3 Marginal preservation and entropy loss

Sampling within each block according to the original token probabilities preserves the token
marginal of the corrected coupling. It also leaves the block choice as the only source of dependence
between the token and the selected column. The following result makes these statements precise
and identiﬁes the resulting loss of conditional entropy.

Theorem A.4 (Marginal preservation and the entropy identity). Fix           an NTP    distribution P
                                                                            laws r(·  | j) satisfying
with support A, a      partition g with block law ρ, and conditional block  | j)/m,   and sample W
                       = ρb. Let J be uniform on [m], set π(b, j) = r(b
m−1   m    r(b  |  j)
      j=1

from

                       Q(w | j) = r{g(w) | j} Pw ,         w ∈ A,
                                                    ρg(w)

with Q(w | j) = 0 outside A. The denominator is positive on A. Writing C = g(W ), we have

                            1m
                                    Q(w | j) = Pw,

                            m j=1
                       I(W ; J) = I(C; J) = DKL(π∥ρ ⊗ um)

                                                = H(P ) − EJ H{Q(· | J)}
                                                ≤ min{H(ρ), log m}.

Consequently, for H(P ) > 0, an entropy loss of I(W ; J) = βeﬀ H(P ) retains the fraction 1 − βeﬀ of
NTP entropy on average over columns. This is not a bound for each individual column or key. If,
at every unmasked position, the column index is uniform conditionally on the preceding generation
history and on the current partition and transport table, and if masked positions sample directly
from the NTP distribution, then the generated sequence, averaged over keys, has the same law as
unwatermarked generation.

Proof of Theorem A.4. For w ∈ A and b = g(w), substituting the lift and using the block marginal
gives m−1 j Q(w | j) = Pw; both sides vanish outside A. The joint law factors as Pr(J) Pr(C |
J)P (W | C), so W ⊥ J | C. Since C is a function of W , I(W ; J) = I(C; J). The law of (C, J) is π

                       15
with marginals ρ and um, giving the KL identity. The entropy identity follows from the preserved
marginal W ∼ P , and the bound follows from I(C; J) ≤ min{H(C), H(J)} = min{H(ρ), log m}.
Conditioning ﬁrst on the generation history, partition and table permits the same averaging over
columns at each unmasked position. Masked positions follow the NTP distribution by assumption.
Iterating these conditional identities proves the sequence statement.

    The sequence statement requires conditional uniformity after observing the generated history.
Reusing the pseudorandom values for a repeated context can violate this condition, even though
the identity at a ﬁxed preﬁx remains valid. Fresh independent values at each position, or masking
repeated contexts under an ideal model with independent randomness for distinct contexts, pro-
vide suﬃcient conditions. A practical pseudorandom function approximates this ideal model; the
theorem does not assert exact independence for a ﬁxed key.

B Speculative sampling with a shared key

B.1 Generation and block veriﬁcation

We combine the block watermark with speculative sampling by watermarking both the draft and

target distributions with the same secret key k. Both models apply marginal correction before

sampling or evaluating token probabilities. Their NTP distributions and target entropy losses may

diﬀer.

     Let  Pd   and   Pt          be  the       draft  and    target   NTP          distributions         at    the  initial  preﬁx   followed   by

            i          i                                                                                                             Qd         Qti .

the  ﬁrst  i−1   proposals.               Denote      their  watermarked           distributions         conditional      on  k  by     i  and

Both models use the same key and construction of pseudorandom values. Their diﬀerent NTP

distributions can nevertheless yield diﬀerent conditional token distributions. Veriﬁcation uses the

watermarked probabilities that govern sampling, as required by Proposition B.1.

Algorithm B.1 Speculative sampling with a shared watermark key

Require: Draft and target models, shared key k, draft length K ≥ 1, and both watermark conﬁg-

     urations

1: for i = 1, . . . , K do

2:        Compute    Pd          and      its  corrected     watermarked           distribution          Qd    using  k.

                       i                                                                                    i
                           Qd
3:        Draw  xi  ∼               with      fresh  sampling    randomness.
                              i

4: end for

5:   Compute    Pt   ,  .  .  .  ,  P tK  +1   in  parallel  in  one  target       forward        pass.

                  1                                                       t                    t
                                                                          1                    K
6:   Apply  the  watermark                with     key  k  to  obtain  Q     ,  .  .  .  ,  Q     +1  .

7: Compute ri, hi by (B.1)–(B.2).

8: Draw independent Ui ∼ Uniform(0, 1) and set Lkeep = max({0} ∪ {i : Ui ≤ hi}).

9: if Lkeep < K then

10: Draw W ∼ RLkeep from (B.3).                                                                                                  ▷ Bonus token
11: else
12: Draw W ∼ QtK+1.
13: end if

14: Emit (x1, . . . , xLkeep, W ) and discard the remaining proposals.

Drafting and target evaluation. The draft proposes K tokens sequentially from its water-
marked distributions. The target then evaluates all draft positions and the possible bonus position

                                                               16
in one forward pass. Once these NTP distributions are available, their OT problems can also be
solved in a batch. Proposal draws, veriﬁcation uniforms and the ﬁnal draw use fresh independent
sampling randomness. The models must use compatible token identiﬁers and input formatting, and
probabilities must reﬂect the temperature, truncation and watermarking used for generation.

Joint veriﬁcation. Block veriﬁcation tests candidate preﬁx lengths jointly and can retain a
longer preﬁx even if a shorter one fails its test (Sun et al., 2025). Starting from r0 = 1, deﬁne

                                           Qti (xi )               i = 1, . . . , K.                (B.1)
                        ri = min ri−1 d , 1 ,

                                           Qi (xi)

The denominator is positive for every proposal that can be sampled. The quantity ri can decrease

for a token less likely under the target and recover when later proposals favor it. For 1 ≤ i < K,

t d set zi
             zi = [riQi+1(w) − Qi+1(w)]+,                hi = zi + 1 − ri ,           hK = rK ,     (B.2)

                     w∈V

where [a]+ = max(a, 0) and hi = 1 if its numerator and denominator both vanish. Independent
tests Ui ≤ hi determine the longest retained preﬁx Lkeep. A failed test at one length does not
rule out retaining a longer preﬁx. These tests and the following residual must be used together to
preserve the target law.

Correction and bonus tokens.               If Lkeep < K, the remaining proposals are discarded and the
next token is drawn from
                                           [rLkeep QtLkeep+1(w) − QdLkeep+1(w)]+                    (B.3)
                             RLkeep (w) =  v∈V [rLkeep QLkeep+1 t (v) − QLkeep+1 d (v)]+ .

This residual supplies the target mass missing from the draft. Its denominator is positive whenever

this branch has positive probability. No additional watermark transformation is applied to the

residual, because it is already derived from the watermarked distributions. If all K proposals are
retained, a bonus token is drawn directly from QtK+1 without another target forward pass. When
caching is enabled, the model caches are restored to the retained preﬁx before continuing, and

stopping rules are applied to emitted tokens in order.

B.2 Distribution preservation and detection

Proposition B.1 (Preservation of the watermarked target law). Fix a key k. Suppose each proposal

is  sampled  from  the  conditional  distribution  Qd    used  in  veriﬁcation,  each       target  distribution  Qt

                                                      i                                                              i

is the one used by direct watermarked target generation at the same preﬁx, and all draws use

fresh independent sampling randomness. With exact probability calculations, repeated application

of Algorithm B.1 generates the same law for the output sequence as direct sampling from the target’s

watermarked distributions conditional on k.

Proof of Proposition B.1. Fix k and suppress it from the notation. Let X1, . . . , XK denote the
draft proposals. We ﬁrst verify the retention identity from Sun et al. (2025, Lemma 3),

                                     Pr(Lkeep ≥ i | X1:i = x1:i) = ri,

                                                   17
where later proposals and veriﬁcation uniforms are averaged out. The identity holds for i = K
because hK = rK. For the induction step, the recursion in (B.1) gives

                                Qdi+1(w)ri+1(x1:i, w) = min{Qdi+1(w), riQti+1(w)}.

Assuming the identity at i + 1, summing over w gives

Pr(Lkeep > i | X1:i = x1:i) = ri − zi.

The uniform Ui is independent of all later proposals and tests. The probability of retaining at least
i proposals is therefore

                                            (ri − zi) + (1 − ri + zi)hi = ri,

including the case ri = 1, zi = 0. Backward induction proves the identity. Hence the probability of
correction at length i, conditional on the proposed preﬁx, is zi. For i = 0, deﬁne z0 by the same
positive-part sum as in (B.2), with r0 = 1; the same conclusion follows from the identity at i = 1.

    The residual ﬁlls the missing mass because, for 0 ≤ i < K,

Qdi+1(w)ri+1(x1:i, w) + ziRi(w) = riQti+1(w).

retained proposal  correction

For tokens with Qdi+1(w) = 0, the retained proposal contributes zero and the residual supplies
the required target mass. When zi = 0, correction at that preﬁx has probability zero and its
contribution is deﬁned as zero. Starting from r0 = 1, this balance gives the target conditional
distribution for the next output token. After a correction, the procedure restarts at the emitted
preﬁx; after K retained proposals, the bonus token follows the target law. Induction over emitted
tokens establishes the sequence law (Sun et al., 2025, Theorem 1). The argument holds conditional
on the shared key and does not require separate draft and target keys.

    Thus diﬀerent draft settings aﬀect acceptance and computational cost while preserving the ideal
target output law. The OT solves themselves need not reach the exact optimum: the proposition
applies to the corrected distributions actually used, provided that sampling and veriﬁcation use
the same probabilities and that the target distribution matches direct target generation at each
preﬁx. Numerical errors in evaluating acceptance probabilities or normalizing residuals can aﬀect
the identity. Averaging over keys recovers the same distribution as direct watermarked target gen-
eration. Equality with unwatermarked generation additionally requires the conditional uniformity
assumptions in Theorem A.4.

    Detection uses the shared key and the target watermark conﬁguration, following Section 3.2.
It does not require draft tokens to be identiﬁed or iteration boundaries to be recorded. Under
the proposition’s conditions, the same detector calibration and deﬁnitions of diversity apply as for
direct watermarked target generation. Retained entropy is determined by the target’s achieved
entropy loss. Acceptance rate and elapsed time require empirical measurement.

C Related work

C.1 Language model watermarks

Early text watermarks modiﬁed completed passages through syntactic transformations or synonym
substitution (Atallah et al., 2001; Topkara et al., 2006). Modern generative watermarks intervene
during decoding. At each step, a pseudorandom function of the secret key and context generates

                   18
reproducible values that guide token sampling. The detector reconstructs these values from the
text and key and tests for dependence between them and the observed tokens (Li et al., 2025a).

     Diﬀerent methods address diﬀerent objectives. Green list methods bias generation toward a
keyed subset of tokens to improve detectability while maintaining text quality (Kirchenbauer et al.,
2023, 2024). Adaptive methods and variants that assign diﬀerent strengths to individual tokens
adjust this bias across contexts (Liu and Bu, 2024; Huo et al., 2024). Watermarks that carry several
bits can encode identiﬁers or metadata for attribution, rather than only indicating the presence
of a watermark (Fernandez et al., 2023; Yoo et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2026; Chen et al., 2026).
Cryptographic approaches study watermarks that are computationally undetectable without the
key, resistance to adversarial changes, and limits on secure watermarking (Christ et al., 2024; Christ
and Gunn, 2024; Zhang et al., 2024). Semantic methods use features or sentence representations
that can be less sensitive to changes in individual tokens, with the aim of retaining a signal after
edits such as paraphrasing (Liu et al., 2024; Hou et al., 2024; Dabiriaghdam and Wang, 2025;
Nemecek et al., 2026).

     We study how watermarking changes the sampling diversity available under a ﬁxed key. Our
construction embeds a binary provenance signal during generation and preserves the NTP distri-
bution after averaging over keys. Its entropy budget measures the average sampling randomness
removed to create dependence on the key.

C.2 Unbiasedness and diversity under a ﬁxed key

Green list methods generally change the NTP distribution even after averaging over their keyed
token subsets (Kirchenbauer et al., 2023, 2024). We focus on methods that preserve this distribution
after averaging over keyed randomness. At a ﬁxed preﬁx, the randomly drawn key induces Ξ ∼ µ, as
in Section 2. Such methods are variously called unbiased, distribution preserving, or distortion free;
we use unbiased, following the statistical literature (Hu et al., 2024; Li et al., 2025a). An unbiased
watermark deﬁnes a coupling of Ξ and the generated token W whose token marginal is the original
NTP distribution. Examples include Gumbel-max sampling (Aaronson, 2023; Sander et al., 2026),
reweighting schemes (Hu et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2025), inverse transform sampling
(Kuditipudi et al., 2024), optimized couplings (Xie et al., 2025; Tsur et al., 2025), and tournament
sampling (Dathathri et al., 2024). MCmark reweights token probabilities by favoring a vocabulary
segment selected using the key, with the adjustments designed to preserve the NTP distribution on
average (Chen et al., 2025). Our method also groups tokens, but determines the conditional block
probabilities through an OT problem whose marginal constraints preserve the NTP distribution
and whose entropy-loss budget controls the sampling randomness retained under a ﬁxed key.

     Unbiasedness at each ﬁxed preﬁx does not by itself establish preservation of the entire sequence
distribution. Repeated contexts can reuse the same keyed values, so their conditional distribution
depends on the preceding generation history (Cai et al., 2025). Dathathri et al. (2024, Supplemen-
tary Appendices G.2 and G.3) distinguish these guarantees and mask repeated context windows
to preserve the sequence distribution. Both guarantees average over keyed randomness. Neither
directly controls the entropy H{Q(· | ξ)} that remains after the preﬁx and keyed values are ﬁxed.
We quantify its reduction from H(P ) on average over Ξ.

     Fu et al. (2024) address the lack of diversity in Gumbel-max generation under a ﬁxed key.
GumbelSoft samples from a softmax distribution over perturbed logits instead of taking the hard
maximum. This restores sampling randomness but does not generally preserve the original NTP
distribution, which separates its objective from unbiased entropy control.

     Recent work also optimizes the coupling directly. He et al. (2025a) jointly optimize the water-
marking scheme and detector under a distortion constraint, obtaining an unbiased construction as

                                                               19
the zero distortion case. Long et al. (2025) optimize the worst case detection power over a class
of NTP distributions. Huang et al. (2026) jointly optimize a coupling and an e-value for detection
that remains valid under optional stopping. Tsur et al. (2025) use OT with costs based on coding
theory or distributions with heavy tails. Gloaguen et al. (2026) consider a broader constrained opti-
mization framework that allows both unbiased and biased watermarks. Their proposed PPL-based
methods do not generally preserve the original NTP distribution, because controlling expected log-
likelihood does not ensure unbiasedness. We require this distribution to be preserved and use OT
to control the sampling entropy retained under a ﬁxed key.

    Our construction uses the coupling’s KL divergence from independence to control the average
entropy loss. Applying this constraint to blocks of tokens reduces the optimization dimension while
preserving relative probabilities within each block.

C.3 Statistical inference for language model watermarks

Watermark detection tests for dependence between text and keyed randomness, often through a
statistic whose null distribution does not depend on the unknown NTP distributions (Huang et al.,
2023; Li et al., 2025a; Cai et al., 2026; He et al., 2025b). Related tasks estimate the proportion of
watermarked text in a mixture or locate watermarked segments (Li et al., 2025b; Zhao et al., 2025;
Li et al., 2024; Pan et al., 2025; Sander et al., 2026; Blanchet et al., 2026). Editing can weaken the
evidence, motivating goodness-of-ﬁt tests and analyses of robustness (Li et al., 2026; Krishna et al.,
2023; Zhao et al., 2024; Golowich and Moitra, 2024).

    We test for a watermark across the scored positions of a passage. The detector reconstructs
Gumbel values, but their distribution under watermarked generation diﬀers from that of Gumbel-
max. Results about the power or optimality of a detector for Gumbel-max therefore do not transfer
automatically. Section 3.2 gives our score and its null calibration under explicit independence
assumptions.

                                                               20
