SKIP TO MAIN CONTENT
The homepage
SUBSCRIBE
5
AI
NEWS
POLICY
OpenAI is adding text watermarking in ChatGPT and Codex

﻿It’s launching textGrain watermarking in the EU, but OpenAI says it won’t be the ‘global default’ yet.

by 
Stevie Bonifield
Oct 5, 2026, 2:08 PM EDT
5
5
Comments (All New)
Image: The Verge
Stevie Bonifield is a news writer covering all things consumer tech. Stevie started out at Laptop Mag writing news and reviews on hardware, gaming, and AI.

An invisible, machine-readable watermark in text output is rolling out to ChatGPT and Codex, but only for users in the European Union at first.

OpenAI says its textGrain watermarking “matched or exceeded” other approaches like Google DeepMind’s SynthID for text, which is also the basis for the watermarking Anthropic announced in August. Like OpenAI, Anthropic made the move to meet the requirements of the EU’s AI Act; however, not everyone was happy to learn about the addition.

OpenAI also included scores from AI benchmarks showing similar performance from watermarked and unwatermarked text. But it notes that textGrain “does not guarantee reliable detection,” and says text watermarks don’t verify accuracy, determine who owns the text, measure how much a human contributed, or prove human authorship.

Rolling out text watermarking in the EU. Over the coming weeks, we will introduce text watermarking to eligible ChatGPT and Codex users across all plans in the EU only. We are not making text watermarking a global default at launch. This regional approach gives us room to learn from real-world use and feedback.

Enabling opt-in watermarking for API customers. Starting today, API customers around the world will be able to opt in to watermarked text outputs for select models. This lets customers decide how watermarking fits their transparency obligations and the experiences they provide to users. We are also working with cloud partners to make watermarking available for OpenAI model outputs accessed through their services in the coming weeks.

Providing detector access to researchers and expert organizations. Approved researchers and expert organizations can apply starting today. In accordance with the Code of Practice, access will be initially granted on a case-by-case basis to support evaluation and improvement of text provenance. The tool will report whether it detects an OpenAI watermark, without identifying the user or revealing their prompts or conversations. Given the risk of missed watermarks and false positives, we are not making it publicly available at launch.

5
 COMMENTS
Follow topics and authors from this story to see more like this in your personalized homepage feed and to receive email updates.
STEVIE BONIFIELD
AI
NEWS
OPENAI
POLICY
POLITICS
REGULATION
More in AI
This startup is issuing AI-generated acne prescriptions
EMMA ROTH4:14 PM EDT3
All the drama around AI’s takeover of mathematics
ROBERT HART3:28 PM EDT
Wikipedia operator says OpenAI’s ‘rogue’ bots may be linked to a May outage
JAY PETERS3:05 PM EDT2
OpenAI PR tells journalist to ‘move on’ while asking Sam Altman about a ChatGPT user’s suicide
EMMA ROTH12:55 PM EDT26
Sam Altman says ‘some bad things’ will happen, but AI is totally worth it
ROBERT HART12:44 PM EDT43
Sen. Adam Schiff on AI regulation, free speech, and impeaching Trump one more time
NILAY PATEL10:30 AM EDT11
ADVERTISER CONTENT FROM

This is the title for the native ad

Top Stories
6:00 AM EDT
Our minds aren’t equipped to handle AI
8:02 AM EDT
TCL’s paperlike OLED phone made me more excited for the iPhone Duo
12:44 PM EDT
Sam Altman says ‘some bad things’ will happen, but AI is totally worth it
10:30 AM EDT
Sen. Adam Schiff on AI regulation, free speech, and impeaching Trump one more time﻿
2:41 PM EDT
Hyundai CEO says only a ‘level playing field’ can minimize damage from China
Contact
Tip Us
Community Guidelines
Archives
About
Ethics Statement
How We Rate and Review Products
Cookie Settings
Terms of Use
Privacy Policy
Your California Privacy Rights
Your Privacy Choices
Cookie Notice
AdChoices
Licensing FAQ
Accessibility
Platform Status
Penske Media Corporation

The Verge is a part of PMX Global, LLC, a subsidiary of Penske Media Corporation.

© 2026 VM Publishing, LLC. All rights reserved.

OUR SITES

Terms of Use/Your Privacy Rights

This website is now part of PMX Global, LLC, a subsidiary of Penske Media Corporation. By continuing to use our services, you agree to the PMC Terms of Use, including waiver and arbitration. PMC, its service providers, and third-party partners process information about you and how you use our services, including clicks and screen recordings, using first and third-party cookies, pixels, and similar technologies. Where applicable, you can opt out of certain uses of cookies via the Your Privacy Choices link in our footer. Learn more about our data practices in our Privacy Policy.