We value your privacy

We and our 3 partners use cookies and other tracking technologies to improve your experience on our website. We may store and/or access information on a device and process personal data, such as your IP address and browsing data, for personalised advertising and content, advertising and content measurement, audience research and services development. Additionally, we may utilize precise geolocation data and identification through device scanning.

Please note that your choices apply across all our subdomains. Once you give consent, a floating button will appear at the bottom of your screen, allowing you to change or withdraw your consent at any time. We respect your choices and are committed to providing you with a transparent and secure browsing experience. Privacy and Cookies policy

Customize
Accept All
Skip to content
IOP Science home
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter
A solid-state hybrid density functional theory study of Prussian blue analogues and related chlorides at pressure

Derek S Middlemiss, Lorreta M Lawton and Chick C Wilson

Published 31 July 2008 • IOP Publishing Ltd
Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter, Volume 20, Number 33
Citation Derek S Middlemiss et al 2008 J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 20 335231
DOI 10.1088/0953-8984/20/33/335231

Article metrics

733 Total downloads

17
Submit
Submit to this Journal
Permissions

Get permission to re-use this article

Share this article
Abstract

The variations with pressure in the structural, electronic and magnetic properties of a series of Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) KIMII[CrIII(CN)6] (M = VII, MnII and NiII) and associated isomorphous chlorides KIMIICrIIICl6 are investigated within a series of solid-state hybrid density functional calculations. The sensitivity of the computed properties to the choice of Hamiltonian is tested by application of functionals containing 35%, 65% and 100% admixtures of Fock exchange. Magnetic coupling constants (J) are obtained at a range of cell volumes (V), with fits of the Bloch relationship (, ε typically 3–4) yielding exponents ε in the ranges 5.16–6.34, 8.48–12.07 and 4.00–4.51 for the antiferromagnetic (AF) VIICrIII-, ferrimagnetic (FI) MnIICrIII- and ferromagnetic (FO) NiIICrIII PBAs, respectively; and 3.33–4.99, 1.86–3.09 and 1.65–3.28 for the AF VIICrIII-, FO MnIICrIII- and FO NiIICrIII chlorides, respectively. The MnIICrIII PBA range encloses the high values ε∼9–10 obtained in a recent joint experimental and theoretical study, and it is suggested that this strong magnetostructural effect arises due to the presence of competing AF and FO interactions in this material. Estimates of the spin ordering temperatures derived from the combination of the 35%-functional couplings with a mean field approach are in good agreement with experiment in the VIICrIII and NiIICrIII PBAs, but are too low in the MnIICrIII system. The variations with pressure in the structural parameters, charges and spin moments are also detailed, the PBA and chloride energy–volume data yielding bulk moduli in the ranges 39–53 and 36–50 GPa, respectively. Finally, the energies governing CN– ligand isomerization are estimated and successfully interpreted in terms of a simple crystal field stabilization model.

Export citation and abstract
BibTeX
RIS

Authors
Article information
Previous article in issue
Next article in issue
Access this article

The computer you are using is not registered by an institution with a subscription to this article. Please choose one of the options below.

Login

IOPscience login


Purchase from

Article Galaxy
CCC RightFind

Purchase this article from our trusted document delivery partners.

Rent from

This article is available from DeepDyve.

Make a recommendation

To gain access to this content, please complete the Recommendation Form and we will follow up with your librarian or Institution on your behalf.

For corporate researchers we can also follow up directly with your R&D manager, or the information management contact at your company. Institutional subscribers have access to the current volume, plus a 10-year back file (where available).

Show references
You may also like
JOURNAL ARTICLES
Second Harmonic Generation in Electrochemically Synthesized Films of Ternary Metal Prussian Blue Analogs
Raman Spectroscopy of Monolayers Formed from Chromate Corrosion Inhibitor on Copper Surfaces
Storage and Release of Soluble Hexavalent Chromium from Chromate Conversion Coatings Equilibrium Aspects of Cr VI  Concentration
Tribological Behaviors of Amorphous Cr Coatings Electrodeposited from Cr ( III )  Baths under Ionic Liquid Lubrication
Alloy 600 Aqueous Corrosion at Elevated Temperatures and Pressures: An In Situ Raman Spectroscopic Investigation
Probing superexchange interaction in a very hard 3d–4f single-molecule magnet by inelastic neutron scattering
PhD positions in Quantum Materials research
International Max Planck Research School for Chemistry and Physics of Quantum Materials
Multiple Faculty Searches
University of California
Tenure-Track Assistant Professorship in Theoretical Quantum Condensed Matter Physics
University of Basel
More jobs
Post a job
IOPSCIENCE
Journals
Books
IOP Conference Series
About IOPscience
Contact Us
Developing countries access
IOP Publishing open access policy
Accessibility
IOP PUBLISHING
Copyright notice
Terms and Conditions
Disclaimer
Privacy and Cookie Policy
Text and Data mining policy
PUBLISHING SUPPORT
Authors
Reviewers
Conference Organisers
ABOUT IOP PUBLISHING
IOP Publishing, the publishing arm of the Institute of Physics, is a purpose-led, not-for-profit, society-owned scientific publisher. We publish high-quality, trusted, peer-reviewed research in over 100 scientific journals on our IOPscience platform, providing visibility, recognition, and impact for work across the physical sciences.
IOP Publishing Facebook page
IOP Publishing LinkedIn page
IOP Publishing Youtube page
IOP Publishing WeChat QR code
IOP Publishing Weibo page
IOP Publishing Bluesky page
IOP Publishing Threads page