Thanks for visiting!
X

Sign up for The A.V. Club's free newsletter to have the best TV, film, and news stories sent straight to your inbox.

 
Email
Sign Up
Already receiving our newsletter? Click here.
Paste
|
A.V. Club
|
Jezebel
|
Splinter
|
Daytrotter
|
Moshpit
Latest
News
TV
Film
Music
Games
Subscribe
Newsletter
AI has come for comics on stage and in The New Yorker
As one comedian discovers an AI-generated woman stealing his jokes, a slew of New Yorker cartoonists are having their signatures added to slop. 
By Matt Schimkowitz  |  October 5, 2026 | 7:24pm
(Photo by Xavi Torrent/Getty Images)
NEWS NEWS AI   9

By design, large language models plagiarize because for generative AI to work at the scale we’re told it must, the LLM must ingest everything it can to spit out something similar. As the technology has proliferated, it has found a home on social media, where relaxed moderation policies meet an endless appetite for more content. As we’ve seen time and again, once something hits social media, its creator no longer owns it. In the past, that could mean an idea becoming a meme that’s outside the creator’s control. But now, much of what people post becomes material for AI to ingest and regurgitate. That’s what’s happening to comedian George Brett Olson, who realized an AI-generated woman was stealing his jokes, movements, and even the color of his outfit from a video of his stand-up set. 

Caught by writer Nate Bowling in his Takes & Typos newsletter, Olson’s video breaks down how Tiffany Sloan, a fake woman with massive physical features very different from his own, uses his jokes and movements as motion capture, like he was Andy Serkis and “she” was Gollum. Sloan’s creators are stealing all the way to the bank, amassing a massive following on others’ hard work (Olson isn’t the only comedian it copied) and directing viewers to the AI’s OnlyFans page. Unsurprisingly, it didn’t violate Meta’s terms of service. Even weirder, it’s telling Olson’s joke about AI taking everyone’s jobs. Or as Bowling succinctly puts it: “A working comedian had his joke stolen by an anonymous person who created a big-butted hot girl AI avatar, which then stole his jokes and dozens of others’, monetized the theft, ran an adult content side hustle, and somehow managed to violate none of Meta’s terms of service.”

But stand-up comics aren’t the only ones vulnerable to AI. New Yorker comics artists are also getting robbed. A recent report from Nieman Labs reveals that the signatures of real New Yorker artists are being slapped on AI-generated New Yorker cartoons without their knowledge or consent. Nieman Lab found that ChatGPT has stolen the signatures of more than 15 New Yorker cartoonists, including Brendan Loper, Harry Bliss, Emily Flake, Pat Byrnes, George Booth, Liza Donnelly, and more. For artists, their signature carries currency, authenticating their work and giving it value. 

In 2024, OpenAI signed a licensing deal with The New Yorker’s parent company, Condé Nast. However, the tech company was not permitted to train on cartoons. Somehow, it’s creating New Yorker-style cartoons with real cartoonists’ signatures. OpenAI’s product currently generates New Yorker slop with real signatures at the bottom. OpenAI told Nieman Lab, “This prompt may violate our guardrails concerning similarity to third-party content,” but has done nothing about it.

“It’s an uncanny simulacrum of an impression of a joke,” Jason Adam Katzenstein, a 12-year veteran of the New Yorker pages, tells Nieman Lab. “But it’s not the point for it to actually be funny or good. The point is that it’s trying to deal a death blow to labor. It’s trying to render individual cartoonists obsolete because we cost money and take time.”

Last month, unsealed and unredacted court documents from The New York Times ongoing litigation against OpenAI and Microsoft revealed Microsoft director of applied science Brent Hecht calling AI training the “largest theft of labor in human history.” We suppose these are just two more examples for his argument. 

 
Show all 9 comments...
 Keep scrolling for more great stories.
David Zaslav bids farewell to industry he helped destroy
In a video address to employees on the eve of the Paramount takeover, David Zaslav says it’s been an "honor" to oversee so many HBO name changes. 
By Matt Schimkowitz  |  October 5, 2026 | 5:52pm
Slaven Vlasic/Getty Images for The New York Times
NEWS NEWS DAVID ZASLAV   58

Exiting the company via a “golden parachute,” David Zaslav waved goodbye to the industry he helped destroy this evening. In a three-minute video address, transcribed by Variety, to the employees he didn’t have a chance to fire, Zaslav says, “It’s been a great honor to be alongside all of you,” hoping those still-employed Warner workers “take pride in what you’ve built, what you’ve created, and the role you’ve played in shaping an extraordinary history.” The video contained a montage of projects released during Zaslav’s reign, including Barbie, which can now get that sequel Zaslav couldn’t get together, and Harry Potter, relieving him of having to read another actor’s justification for participating in a project at least one former Warner Bros. director says “funds trans genocide.” 

“Behind every one of those moments is the work, talent and commitment of everyone who does their part to bring it all to life,” he continues. “And that is what matters. Honoring the work that came before us, doing our part to carry it forward and knowing that the work continues.”

Tomorrow, Zaslav will be back on the market when the Paramount merger closes, and Warner Bros. becomes a part of someone else’s debt-ridden movie conglomerate. Arriving at the company four years ago through a merger with Discovery, where Zaslav was CEO, he set about unsuccessfully reducing the company’s $43 billion in debt through rounds of layoffs and canceling film projects. His most high-profile cancellations were an unfinished Batgirl movie and shelving Coyote Vs. Acme, the Looney Tunes movie currently on track to outgross every single Warner Bros. release this year. Zaslav leaves the company, which Paramount will borrow $80 billion to consume, more than $550 million richer, and the industry he insisted he loved so much, one century-old studio smaller than when he found it. 

“I can’t wait to see what you do in the years ahead. I’m so grateful for all these years at Warner Bros. Discovery, for the wonderful experiences creating content, telling stories and getting to know so many of you,” he concludes. “Thank you so much.”

 
Show all 58 comments...
 Keep scrolling for more great stories.
Letterboxd users attempt to pool money to buy platform
The site dedicated to film fans of all kinds is still up for sale.
By Olivia Singh  |  October 5, 2026 | 5:36pm
FILM NEWS LETTERBOXD   11

Letterboxd users are trying to put the future of their beloved film-centric platform into their own hands. For months, Tiny, the Canadian holding company with a controlling stake in Letterboxd, has been shopping the user-focused social media platform around to interested parties. And there are plenty of interested parties, to say the least. The potential sale has sent users into a frenzy—and who could blame them, especially amid the near-complete merger of Paramount Skydance and Warner Bros. Discovery and what the last few years have done to Twitter. Now, Intrinsic Entertainment Collaborative, a public benefit company, has launched a grassroots campaign called Letterboxd4All to rally the Letterboxd community to buy the majority stake by making a minimum $100 investment for equity ownership on Wefunder or donating $1 or more through GoFundMe. “The valuation of Letterboxd reflects the years of creative labor users have contributed to building the platform,” Elizabeth Joyce, founder of Intrinsic, told TheWrap. “Our campaign is a reflection of people’s frustration at seeing value extracted from their communities. Our model offers communities the chance to be the owner, not the product.”

Letterbox’s growth has been exponential in recent years, and the platform has a staggering 30 million users, according to Inc. It’s become a space where celebrity users, from Charli xcx and Rachel Sennott to Martin Scorsese and Francis Ford Coppola, can drop their hot takes or praise the work of their peers. The success has resulted in celebrities eagerly rattling off their top four movies on red carpets, and, for better or worse, fans immediately logging their reviews as soon as a film’s credits roll. It’s no surprise that movie fans of every kind, from casual viewers to cinephiles who take pride in watching multiple films a week, are desperate to preserve the platform. Plus, there’s an obvious conflict of interest if a major studio buys the platform, since it could influence which films get highlighted or exploited to push its own agenda. Until a sale goes through, either from Letterboxd users or a big studio, Film Twitter will have to stand by anxiously. 

 
Show all 11 comments...
 Keep scrolling for more great stories.
Great Job, Internet!: Wedding Crashing DVDs are uncorking all over Little Free Libraries
The Minneapolis suburbs are facing an outbreak of Vince Vaughn in their tiny, community-operated book depositories.
By Matt Schimkowitz  |  October 5, 2026 | 4:18pm
Screenshot: YouTube
NEWS NEWS GREAT JOB, INTERNET!   48

How do you solve a problem like 1,200 copies of Wedding Crashers on DVD? The art collective Everything Is Terrible once turned 30,000 copies of Jerry Maguire on VHS into a throne, then a temple, then a video store, and, hopefully, one day, a pyramid in the desert made of Tom Cruise’s smiling face. One Minnesotan, however, is taking their addiction to collecting copies of Wedding Crashers and giving it back to the community. 

Last month, Sable Adelaide began spreading the joy of Wedding Crashers by filling up “every Little Free Library I can with copies” of the film, waiting to be uncorked by Little Free patrons looking for a copy of Rich Dad, Poor Dad or The Bible. She documented her mission to remind unsuspecting community members of “mom, the meatloaf” on TikTok, where commenters reported it was sending local Facebook groups into a “frenzy.” Speaking with Minneapolis website Racket in late September, Adelaide explained why she has been stuffing Little Free Libraries with copies of the Owen Wilson and Vince Vaughn comedy. Wow! 

Adelaide had about 1,200 copies of the uncorked DVD, a collection she started after buying a box of Crasher discs for less than $7 as a goof. Like Everything Is Terrible, she leaned into it and began accepting donations, receiving as many as 40 to 70 copies at a time in her PO Box from a single Polish man. “I feel bad for whoever has that P.O. Box now,” she says. While many have described the effort as a prank, Adelaide views it as “100% a queer art installation.” Earlier this year, she held a screening of the film (her first time seeing it—”It actually isn’t that good”), which “was a big trans joy event, and a bunch of people came cross-dressed in different wedding gear.” But ultimately, it’s even simpler than that: “The community’s been through a lot here,” she says, “but it’s also a loving and caring community that really needs a good smile every once in a while. This was the perfect place to do it.” 

Read the full interview at Racket.

 
Show all 48 comments...
Recommended for You
1Anatomy Of A Finale: Does Lanterns soar or sour in the end?
2Slam Frank might be the most subversive show in New York
3Alejandro G. Iñàrritu expected and prefers Digger's negative reception
4The Daily Wire's new ICE propaganda film temporarily shut down in Montana
5John Oliver's comedy squad assesses the threat of an unfit Secret Service
Featured Video
 
AI Policy About Subscribe Advertise Newsletter Facebook Copyright Privacy Contact Us

© 2026 Paste Media Group. All Rights Reserved