Skip to main content
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Subscribe
Subscribe
State of California Department of Justice
    
ROB BONTA

Attorney General
Search
Search
Translate Website | Traducir Sitio Web
HOME
ABOUT
MEDIA
CAREERS
REGULATIONS
RESOURCES
PROGRAMS
APPOINTMENTS
CONTACT
As Part of Ongoing Investigation, Attorney General Bonta Serves Investigative Subpoena on OpenAI
Press Release As Part of Ongoing Investigation, Attorney General Bonta Ser…
Thursday, October 1, 2026
Contact: (916) 210-6000, agpressoffice@doj.ca.gov

OAKLAND — California Attorney General Rob Bonta yesterday served an investigative subpoena on OpenAI as part of the California Department of Justice’s (DOJ) ongoing investigation of incidents resulting from the operations of OpenAI and its artificial intelligence (AI) models. Last month, Attorney General Bonta announced that DOJ is conducting a formal investigation into the Hugging Face incident, while continuing to more broadly monitor the AI industry’s compliance with California laws. The subpoena is part of a broader inquiry into cybersecurity incidents and risks involving the company and its models.

“My office is asking OpenAI additional questions regarding cybersecurity incidents and risks involving the company and its AI models,” said Attorney General Bonta. “Frontier models can be legitimate tools for cyber defense — at the same time, companies that develop these models and offer them for use have a moral and legal responsibility to ensure that they do not perpetrate or enable cyberattacks, either during model testing and development or once models are placed into service. Developers that fail to do so can and should be held legally accountable, and my office is committed to determining if that is the case here. As the top law enforcement official of California, I am committed to using all the tools at my office's disposal to keep California’s residents safe.”

DOJ encourages anyone with information regarding this, or any similar cybersecurity incidents or risks, to contact oag.ca.gov/report. 

Attorney General Bonta is committed to ensuring that AI is safe for both users — including children and teens — and the public. Last month, he and a bipartisan coalition of attorneys general sent a letter to Congress to urge leaders to take immediate action to regulate large scale AI models and developers, in light of recent reports of critical cyber safety incidents at multiple frontier AI labs and warnings from insiders that the continued pace of AI development is becoming increasingly dangerous. In January, he announced opening an investigation into reports of rampant nonconsensual sexually explicit material on X and produced using Grok, an AI model developed by xAI. DOJ also stands ready to enforce California's recently enacted companion chatbot children's safety (SB 1119) and chatbot-enabled toy (SB 867) laws when they become effective.  

Last year, Attorney General Bonta issued two legal advisories reminding Californians of their rights and advising businesses and healthcare entities that develop, sell, or use AI of their obligations to comply with existing California laws. He also sent a letter to 12 of the top AI companies after reports of sexually inappropriate interactions between AI chatbots and children. Attorney General Bonta has time and time again defended California's right to protect residents from risks posed by AI technology. He is proud to have opposed the federal government's first, second, and third attempts to prevent state regulation of AI, and remains committed to defending California’s laws amid the Trump Administration's attempts to hobble states' right to protect their residents and foster safe AI technology.

# # #
STATE OF CALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
OFFICE OF THE ATTORNEY GENERAL
Search
Search

WHO WE ARE

About AG Rob Bonta
History of the Office
Organization of the Office

WHAT WE DO

Public Safety
Opinions and Quo Warranto
Research
Children & Families
Civil Rights
Consumer Protection
Environment & Public Health
Grant Opportunities
Tobacco Directory
Tobacco Grants

OPEN GOVERNMENT

Ballot Initiatives
Conflicts of Interest
Criminal Justice Statistics
Meetings and Public Notices
OpenJustice Initiative
Public Records
Publications
Regulations

Memorial

Agents Fallen in the Line of Duty

Vote

Register to Vote

WHAT WE'RE WORKING ON

21st Century Policing
Children’s Rights
Consumer Protection and Economic Opportunity
Environmental Justice
Equality
Federal Accountability
Health Care
Immigration
OpenJustice

MEDIA

Consumer Alerts
Press Releases
Media Library

CAREERS

Getting a State Job
Examinations
Job Vacancies
Internships & Student Positions
Attorney General's Honors Program
Geoffrey Wright Solicitor General Fellowship
Office of the Attorney General Accessibility Privacy Policy Conditions of Use Disclaimer © 2026 DOJ