Cloudflare tries to outplay Jev with open-weight Clef models
Jump to main content
Search
TOPICS
Security
All Security
Cyber-crime
Patches
Research
CSO
Off-Prem
All Off-Prem
Edge and IoT
Channel
PaaS and IaaS
SaaS
On-Prem
All On-Prem
Systems
Storage
Networks
HPC
Personal Tech
Cx0
Public Sector
Software
All Software
AI and ML
Applications
Databases
DevOps
OS Platforms
Virtualization
Offbeat
All Offbeat
Columnists
Science
BOFH
Legal
Site News
About Us
Special Features
All Special Features
Cybersecurity Month 2026
VMware Explore 2026
Cloud Infrastructure Month 2026
HPE: AI Explainers
Agentic AI
The Future of the Datacenter
AWS:Reinvent
Nvidia GTC
Supercomputing Month
Computex 2026
AI Infrastructure Month 2026
The State of Storage 2026
RSA Conference
Vendor Voice
All Vendor Voice
Modernizing Financial Services with FIS and AWS
Barco
Infinidat
Everpure
Rubrik
Make it real with Capgemini and AWS
Money Movement Hub
ZTE
Nutanix: Scale Kubernetes. Not Chaos.
AWS New Horizon
Digicert
Netscout
Resources
Intelligence
Webinars & Events
Newsletters
Search
Sign in
AI
Security
Software
Microsoft
Developer
Open Source
BOFH
Who, Me?
On Call
Science
REG AD
ai and ml
Cloudflare tries to outplay Jev with open-weight Clef models
Sure, it costs more, but it can handle images and video and it's available on Hugging Face if you have the hardware horsepower to run it locally
Brandon Vigliarolo
Brandon
Vigliarolo
GOVERNMENT AND IT NEWS REPORTER
Published
thu 1 Oct 2026 // 21:39 UTC
READ MORE
Cloudflare launches Data Platform with bland 'Basin' branding, promise of fewer fees
17 hours ago
AWS offers local, open source leash for agent harnesses
20 hours ago
The tech industry is hot for shopping bots, but they're years away
1 day ago
7 in 10 enterprises expected to abandon vendor-built agentic AI by 2028
2 days ago
Open source tool distills Jev so you can run it locally
2 days ago
Two weeks after the Jev model took the AI world by storm, Cloudflare has released its own pair of "Clef" decision models that it claims are smarter and faster than Jev, while also being open weight and runnable locally.
The Clef family of decision models was
announced
by Cloudflare on Thursday, and consists of two models: Clef and Clef-flash, a slightly smaller and faster version of the model. For all intents and purposes, they work the same way as
TypeSafe’s Jev
, in that they can answer three types of bounded, structured questions: Yes/no, multiple choice, and rankings.
It’s there that the bigger differences emerge, though, as Clef isn’t only built differently but, if Cloudflare’s benchmark claims hold up, also appears more capable than Jev and several other decision models in a number of tests.
REG AD
For starters, Clef has an LLM backbone. According to Cloudflare, Clef uses specially post-trained, frozen versions of Qwen3.8-27B and Qwen3.5-9B for Clef and Clef-flash, respectively, with the Qwen backbone performing a prefill-only pass during inference. Clef is still fast - faster than Jev, to be fair - and scores choices in parallel after that prefill-only pass. It’s not clear what Jev’s underlying architecture is, as TypeSafe has kept that a secret.
REG AD
As for its speed and capability, Clef moves fast. Cloudflare ran it against Jev and some other open decision models using the Jev Decision Index available on Hugging Face, and the
company’s own ranking
suggests Clef is slightly slower than other open models, but more accurate, with Clef-flash just as accurate as most of the others, but far faster.
To be fair to the competition, Cloudflare self-reported its own scores against the benchmark, and they have yet to be reproduced for ranking on the official
Decision Index
. Cloudflare also ran Clef against TypeSafe’s own benchmarks, and claimed it beat Jev in three out of four areas, only losing out on agent trace observability.
Even if it were a bit slower or less accurate, Clef has another major leg up on Jev: It’s not limited to classifying text - it can also handle images and video. Additionally, Clef supports a 64k context window. Jev can also handle up to 64k tokens across a request, although its state plus longest individual question is limited to 32k.
Clef is available directly from Cloudflare hosted on Workers AI, which the company said makes the models even faster because “we’re able to take advantage of our GPUs at the edge, leading to low network latency and faster decisions.”
For those that would prefer not to pay the token cost (Clef costs $0.24 per million tokens - nearly six times the price of Jev at $0.042/M), Clef can also be
downloaded from Hugging Face
, and is open weight under the same Apache-2.0 terms as Qwen. While described as “open source” in the announcement, Cloudflare AI Platform group product manager Michelle Chen confirmed to
The Register
that its training datasets aren’t public.
As for whether your hardware can run it, Chen told us that Clef-flash will run on any GPU with at least 41 GB of VRAM, while Clef requires 85 GB of VRAM on a GPU for it to function.
“This is assuming single concurrency and a 64k context window,” Chen added.
Don’t worry about having to rebuild your decision model architecture for Clef either - its API is fully Jev compatible, allowing it to serve as a drop-in replacement if you want to give it a shot, either locally or using Cloudflare’s hosting option. ®
ai and ml
cloudflare
jev
artificial intelligence
open weight models
REG AD
OpenAI shows three staff the door over alleged information misuse
Two safety researchers and a program manager dismissed, company denies retaliation for raising concerns
Nvidia debuts $4,999 DGX Spark with half the RAM and storage, amid memory crunch
Meanwhile 128 GB version jumps to $6,950, nearly 75% above its launch price
Huawei Cloud Rolls Out Enterprise AI Products Across the Board, Building an Open Agentic Cloud
PARTNER CONTENT: Huawei Cloud strengthens the silicon bedrock on the cloud
Excel Canvas offers to turn your workbook into the boss's next report
Copilot builds charts and metrics from spreadsheet data, with automatic refreshes when the numbers change
OpenAI apes AWS Marketplace while Anthropic remains stubbornly Microsoftian
By including Baseten in its marketplace, OpenAI signals it wants its models to win on the merits, not through coercion
Teen suspected of running KillSec ransomware group as cops seize servers, arrest three
Operation KillSwitch takes over leak site holding at least 110 TB of stolen data
TOP STORIES
AI models keep posting screenshots showing sensitive data from inside tech companies
Astronomer watches Starlink satellites sinking to build a ‘planetary barometer’
EXCLUSIVE
Microsoft tells nonprofits their deleted M365 data isn't coming back
Google ending ChromeOS support two years early
Stanford prof is beating the drum for a new protocol to replace TCP
FBI to ShinyHunters: 'We know how to find you'
AI
Nvidia debuts $4,999 DGX Spark with half the RAM and storage, amid memory crunch
Meanwhile 128 GB version jumps to $6,950, nearly 75% above its launch price
Pi coding agent pulls a 180 and adds MCP support
To maintain minimalism, a new harness layer has been folded into a separate component
Stanford prof is beating the drum for a new protocol to replace TCP
Homa is a rethink of networks for the AI age
Hot Dog! America's new chatbot is packed with wieners
Just ask America.gov and you'll receive a favorite July 4th food.
Huawei boss claims homegrown AI chip sales top Nvidia in China
The chips may not be as advanced, but they won't get banned at a moment's notice, Eric Xu says
Infosec
Security
Russians are posing as Signal support to launch phishing attacks
PLUS: US takes down Iranian propaganda sites; Marketing company asks 'Why Do We Have Your Information?' And more!
Security
Microsoft patches failed to fix on-prem SharePoint, which is now under zero-day attack
PLUS: China upgrades smartphone surveillance tools; Ring eases anti-snooping stance; and more
Black Hat and DEF CON
DEF CON Franklin project enlists hackers to harden critical infrastructure
Voting village reports have been so successful, says Jeff Moss, that the whole of DEF CON will now be included
Security
EQT buys majority share in Swiss cybersecurity biz Acronis
Went at equivalent of $3.5B+ valuation for entire firm, though portion sold not specified
Malware Month
Ten years since the first corp ransomware, Mikko Hyppönen sees no end in sight
On the plus side, infosec's a good bet for a long, stable career
FOSS
Firefox 157: Could bold new look be just what Mozilla needs?*
Yet another new version of Firefox, with a significant reskin
KDE turns 30 and someone's brought an AI-native desktop proposal
Akademy talk imagines Plasma assembling itself around a personal model of each user
Shopify extends lifeline to Tailwind as vibe coding erodes web dev platform's bottom line
Acquisition gives open source CSS framework 'a stable long-term home'
Switzerland tests a FOSS escape route from Microsoft 365
Swiss Army sticks a knife in American cloud apps with its own FOSS push
Feel peak Windows was 7? You might like Kumander Linux
Debian and Xfce – solid, sensible choices – with a pretty skin
Canonical shuttering some of its legacy chat channels
The Ubuntu Pastebin went in June, IRC gets demoted next
Biting the hand that feeds IT
About Us
Contact us
Advertise with us
Who we are
Newsletter
Our Websites
The Next Platform
DevClass
Blocks and Files
Situation Publishing
Your Privacy
Cookies Policy
Privacy Policy
Ts & Cs
Do not share my personal information
Your Consent Options
Archives
27 years of articles
Copyright. All rights reserved © 1998-2026.