OpenAI holds off on releasing new model over safety concerns, saying it "didn't quite meet the bar" - CBS News
Watch CBS News
OpenAI
has chosen not to release a new artificial intelligence model to the public due to concerns about safety, the company said Monday, as industry leaders warn of the risks that ever-more-powerful
AI technology could pose
to cybersecurity and to humanity more broadly.
The GPT-6.1 Astra model "didn't quite meet the bar in terms of staying within scope and authorization, and how it communicates back to the user about the type of work it's done," Saachi Jain, the company's head of safety systems, said in a statement.
Jain said "there's a trade off" between "staying within scope, but also avoiding laziness in terms of how the model actually pursues tasks even when it hits friction." GPT-6.1 Astra performed better on laziness than prior models, he noted.
He added that before OpenAI releases new models to users, the company has an "extremely high bar in terms of safety and alignment," a term used within the industry to refer to whether an AI system matches humans' intentions and values.
The Wall Street Journal was first to report on the decision.
The decision by ChatGPT-maker OpenAI follows a raft of reports in recent months about AI agents behaving in unexpected ways, evading human guardrails or otherwise going rogue.
Late last week, OpenAI
said its models accessed
publicly available information on the Securities and Exchange Commission and U.S. Census Bureau's websites. And over the summer, two models that were being tested by OpenAI broke out of their isolated testing environment,
gained internet access
and breached another company called Hugging Face.
The company's rival Anthropic
also disclosed in July
that its model Claude "gained unauthorized access" to outside organizations during testing. Earlier this month, Anthropic said
it blocked scientists
from using Claude "in ways that could support biological weapons development," and
disrupted
an "Iran-nexus threat actor" that tried to use the model to generate targeting recommendations for U.S. naval forces.
Ex-Anthropic and OpenAI researcher
Jacob Coxon
publicly warned earlier this month that artificial intelligence "could kill us all by the end of the decade," and argued that major frontier AI companies aren't doing enough to manage the risk.
Some executives have called for guardrails on the development of powerful AI to manage some of the safety risks. Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei has
said
the industry needs to "slow down" and subject its models to external evaluation, an idea that OpenAI CEO Sam Altman
endorsed
. Political figures from both major parties
have also backed limits on AI development
.
Others have rejected calls for an AI slowdown, arguing that the risks are overstated and restrictions on AI research could cause China to outpace the United States.
Nvidia CEO Jensen Huang, whose company designs the chips that power advanced AI technology, called warnings about AI driving humans to extinction "doomsday narratives" in an
interview with CBS News
. Venture capitalist David Sacks, a former Trump administration AI and cryptocurrency czar,
said
any safety risks should be managed by the AI companies themselves, and while caution is warranted, the warnings are "becoming a panic."
President Trump has dismissed calls for stronger guardrails, touting the economic benefits wrought by the AI boom and
calling worries
that the technology could endanger humanity a "hoax."
Mr. Trump and House Speaker Mike Johnson
are set to meet Tuesday
with executives at several leading AI companies, including Anthropic, OpenAI, Google and Meta.
AI: Artificial Intelligence
More
Trump, Johnson to meet with AI execs at White House amid debate over safety
Trump had private dinner with Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei
Could AI really take over the internet? Here's what experts say.
Will artificial intelligence really kill us all?
Australia says rogue OpenAI model hacked into its healthcare system
Go deeper with The Free Press
How Dangerous Is Anthropic’s New AI Model? Its Chief Science Officer Explains.
Anthropic Doesn’t Decide Our Military’s Rules of Engagement
In:
OpenAI
Sam Altman
Jensen Huang
Artificial Intelligence
Anthropic
Why OpenAI didn't roll out its latest model
02:28
Why OpenAI didn't roll out its latest model
(02:28)
Trump had private dinner with Anthropic CEO Dario Amodei
OpenAI agent accessed government website data after going rogue, company reveals
Trump and Xi to set up AI safety channel as military, trade talks continue
How Dangerous Is Anthropic’s New AI Model? Its Chief Science Officer Explains.
View CBS News In
CBS News App
Open
Chrome
Safari
Continue