SOURCE: https://www.businessoffashion.com/articles/beauty/ai-dermatologist-utah-doctor/
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T01:56:10+08:00
META: {"og:title": "The AI Dermatologist Can See You Now", "og:description": "An AI-based healthcare startup started offering acne prescriptions to Utah patients on Monday, the first time a state has allowed such technology to replace the role of a doctor.", "datePublished": "2026-10-05T15:12:44.64Z", "dateModified": "2026-10-05T15:12:44.778Z"}

The AI Dermatologist Can See You Now | BoF
Skip to main content
The Business of Fashion
Agenda-setting intelligence, analysis and advice for the global fashion community.
The AI Dermatologist Can See You Now
An AI-based healthcare startup started offering acne prescriptions to Utah patients on Monday, the first time a state has allowed such technology to replace the role of a doctor.
BOF PROFESSIONALBEAUTY
Share
The move, limited to acne medications, sets the stage for a new era in healthcare in which AI takes on a larger role in routine medical care. (Getty Images)
By 
Bloomberg 
05 October 2026
PREFER BoF ON GOOGLE
Subscribe to the Daily Digest
The essential round-up of fashion news, analysis, and breaking news alerts.Plus, access one complimentary BoF Professional article of your choice, each month.
Email addressSubscribe
Newsletter preferences
Receive news, offers and invites from BoF
Our newsletters may include 3rd-party advertising, by subscribing you agree to the Terms and Conditions (opens in new tab) & Privacy Policy (opens in new tab).
An AI-based healthcare startup on Monday will start offering prescriptions to Utah patients without direct human oversight, the first time a state has allowed such technology to replace the role of a doctor.
Please sign in to ensure you can read our agenda-setting intelligence, analysis and advice.
Or get in touch at support@businessoffashion.com
if you experience difficulties.
Further Reading
What’s Driving the Pocket Dermatology Boom 
Brands like Methodiq, the newest label to launch out of US beauty conglomerate Oddity, want to put dermatologists in every person’s pocket — and disrupt a decades-old system in the process. 
Can AI Pick Your Next Favourite Beauty Product?
More than ever, consumers are turning to online channels to shop for beauty. But without sales associates and dermatologists recommending the best products, AI is stepping in to personalise the consumer experience.
In This Article
Topics
Beauty:Skin Care
Tags
Big Tech
Innovation
© 2026 The Business of Fashion. All rights reserved. For more information read our Terms & Conditions
Loading recommended reads…
Latest News & Analysis
Unrivalled, world class journalism across fashion, luxury and beauty industries.
Vogue Arabia to Launch Annual Ball
The magazine’s inaugural ball will take place in November, the latest in a growing portfolio of live events hosted by publisher Condé Nast.
The Indie Beauty Guide to GEO
While conglomerates like L’Oréal and Estée Lauder dominate chatbot recommendations, independent labels like Divi and Omnilux are boosting AI traffic by targeting niche queries and overhauling backend data.
Lacoste Fired CEO Ahead of Paris Runway Show, Sources Say
The French tennis and lifestyle brand quietly fired its chief executive, Eric ​Vallat, shortly before the brand’s latest ‌Paris fashion show, sources told Reuters.
Frasers Group Acquires 8.8% Stake in Under Armour
The move extends British company’s push into sports brands following a recent purchase of Puma stock.
VIEW MORE
The Daily Digest Newsletter
The essential daily round-up of fashion news, analysis, and breaking news alerts.Plus, access one complimentary BoF Professional article of your choice, each month.
Email addressSubscribe
Newsletter preferences
Receive news, offers and invites from BoF
Our newsletters may include 3rd-party advertising, by subscribing you agree to the Terms and Conditions (opens in new tab) & Privacy Policy (opens in new tab).
The Business of Fashion
Agenda-setting intelligence, analysis and advice for the global fashion community.
CONNECT WITH US ON
Links marked with this notice open in a new tab
© 2026 The Business of Fashion. All rights reserved. For more information read our Terms & Conditions, Privacy Policy, Cookie Policy and Accessibility Statement.
