SOURCE: https://www.fixhealth.ai/p/nollas-autonomous-ai-prescriber-still
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T01:54:01+08:00
META: {"article:modified_time": "2026-10-07T03:09:10.932Z", "og:title": "Nolla’s “Autonomous” AI Prescriber Still Needs a Doctor’s Signature", "og:description": "Utah’s 3rd AI prescribing pilot in 9 months. A 96% accuracy claim with no study. Scripts carrying a clinician’s name the clinician never wrote. And General Catalyst in the cap table. 🤦‍♂️", "datePublished": "2026-10-06T11:44:48+00:00", "dateModified": "2026-10-06T11:44:48+00:00"}

Nolla’s “Autonomous” AI Prescriber Still Needs a Doctor’s Signature
SubscribeSign in
Nolla’s “Autonomous” AI Prescriber Still Needs a Doctor’s Signature
Utah’s 3rd AI prescribing pilot in 9 months. A 96% accuracy claim with no study. Scripts carrying a clinician’s name the clinician never wrote. And General Catalyst in the cap table. 🤦‍♂️
Sergei Polevikov
Oct 06, 2026
∙ Paid
15
2
4
Share
Note: This cover image was generated with Claude and does not depict an actual product, prescription, or state document.
Welcome to AI Health Uncut, a brutally honest newsletter on AI, innovation, and the state of the healthcare market. If you’d like to sign up to receive issues over email, you can do so here.
Important Disclosure. I am an independent journalist with no financial interest, long or short, in any company mentioned here, including Nolla Health, Doctronic, Legion Health, General Catalyst, HATCo, Summa Health, Commure, Hippocratic AI, Heidi Health, Livongo, Teladoc, Mindstrong, SonderMind, Olive AI, Hims & Hers, OpenEvidence, SteadyMD, MDCalc, Mindgard, Aidoc, Clarium, Fabric, Judi Health, Transcarent and Verse Medical. Facts come from public records, company statements and press coverage, hyperlinked at the point of reference. Opinions are my own. Not investment advice.
Yesterday, Bloomberg reported that Nolla Health, a New York startup born in Norway, became the first company allowed to let software write new prescriptions in the United States. Topical acne drugs only, Utah only, for 1 year with an option for 2 more. CEO Luis Wenus called it the “first ever actual end-to-end AI doctor” in a post that drew almost 2M views. The approval came from the same Department of Commerce office that waved through Doctronic’s AI refills in January and Legion Health’s AI psychiatric refills in May. Nolla’s lead investor is General Catalyst, the firm that bought a hospital 12 months ago. God help us all. 🙏
Source: https://www.nollahealth.com/ai-prescriptions
But first, I’m excited to be attending HLTH USA 2026, the marquee healthcare innovation event, November 15-18 in Las Vegas! Join me: https://app.ingo.me/q/56jqv
🎙️ Calling all medical professionals, healthtech folks, and fans of our podcast, Digital Health Inside Out. Alex Koshykov and I are looking for a few brave souls willing to join us for in-person conversations that may range from serious healthcare debates to completely inappropriate healthtech dad jokes. 😄 We’ll be recording right from the floor of HLTH in Las Vegas, November 15–18. 🎰🔥 If you’ll be there and think you’d be a good sport, drop a comment or send either of us a DM. One thing we can promise. It won’t be boring. And yes, things may get a little heated from time to time. 😉
Also, I encourage my readers to become Founding Members of my Substack. I need your support.
By joining, you’re not only supporting my continued investigations and research into healthcare AI. You’re also helping me make this work accessible to people who may not be able to afford a subscription, whether they’re students, between jobs, or simply going through a difficult financial period. (If that’s you, please reach out.)
That’s precisely why I created the AI Health Uncut Founding Member Club. Thanks to the generosity of these wonderful individuals, I’m able to provide access to anyone who needs it.
Become a Founding Member of My Substack
Here is what’s inside:
1. “Autonomous,” With a Physician’s Signature
2. 3 AI Prescribers in 9 Months, All Approved by Commerce, Not Health
3. Doctronic Claimed 99.2%. Nolla Claims 96%. Based on What Evidence? 🤷
4. “Those Prices Are Nuts!” The $4.99 Headline Is Really $55 a Month
5. General Catalyst Is on Both Ends of the Prescription
6. What Would Make Me Sign Up
Continue reading this post for free, courtesy of Sergei Polevikov.
Claim my free post
Or purchase a paid subscription.
© 2026 AI Health LLC · Privacy ∙ Terms ∙ Collection notice
 Start your SubstackGet the app
Substack is the home for great culture
