SOURCE: https://www.medicaleconomics.com/view/utah-s-ai-prescription-pilot-survives-pushback-surprise-billing-dispute-overhaul-uninsured-rate-steady-at-8-morning-medical-update-weekly-recap
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T01:53:39+08:00
META: {"article:published_time": "2026-10-07T17:53:41.915Z", "article:modified_time": "2026-10-07T17:53:41.915Z", "og:title": "Utah's AI prescription pilot survives pushback; surprise-billing dispute overhaul; uninsured rate steady at 8% — Morning Medical Update Weekly Recap | Medical Economics", "datePublished": "2026-05-29T16:06:03.610Z", "dateModified": "2026-05-29T16:21:02.000Z"}

Utah's AI prescription pilot survives pushback; surprise-billing dispute overhaul; uninsured rate steady at 8% — Morning Medical Update Weekly Recap | Medical Economics
 -->
 --> 
Advertisement
News|Articles|May 29, 2026
Utah's AI prescription pilot survives pushback; surprise-billing dispute overhaul; uninsured rate steady at 8% — Morning Medical Update Weekly Recap
Author(s)Austin Littrell
Fact checked by: Keith A. Reynolds
Key Takeaways
 Utah’s medical board argues refills are clinical decisions that can reveal dose issues or interactions, and fears AI renewals could perpetuate outdated therapy without timely reassessment. 
 State regulators kept the pilot active because a licensed physician reviews and signs each AI-generated renewal, while the model routes 28% of encounters to human clinicians. 
 Federal IDR reforms cut the administrative fee to $15 per party, broaden claim bundling, mandate standardized claim codes for payers, and introduce a phased centralized IDR Gateway. 
 With over 5 million disputes since 2022 and providers prevailing in ~88% of decisions, regulators project nearly $80 million in process savings and >$500 million in fee reductions. 
 CDC data place the 2025 uninsured rate near 8%, yet Medicaid redeterminations and lapsing enhanced ACA subsidies may drive enrollment losses and shift patients toward non-ACA coverage with benefit gaps.
SHOW MORE
The top news stories in medicine this week.
Advertisement
Utah declines to suspend its AI prescription-renewal pilot despite a medical board revolt
Five months into the artificial intelligence prescription-renewal program, Utah's Medical Licensing Board wants it suspended — but state regulators are letting it continue.
Utah's Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy has been running a pilot that lets an artificial intelligence (AI) system from health-tech company Doctronic handle routine prescription renewals — 30-, 60- or 90-day refills of existing medications, with no new prescriptions, controlled substances or treatment-plan changes permitted. 
astro-island:empty]:hidden [&:has(>astro-island:empty)+*]:-mt-8"> 
In April, the state's Medical Licensing Board sent a letter demanding an immediate suspension, arguing that a refill is a clinical decision — a chance to catch a dose that needs adjusting or a new drug interaction — and warning that patients could be left on outdated therapy for months or years. The board also objected that the pilot went live before it was ever consulted. State regulators declined to pause the program, noting that in its current phase a licensed physician reviews and signs off on every AI-generated renewal before it reaches a pharmacy — the same standard of care as a traditional practice. According to the state's five-month data, the AI itself declined to recommend renewal in 28% of cases, routing those to a human clinician.
Learn more: Can AI safely renew your patients' prescriptions? Utah is finding out
HHS finalizes long-awaited overhaul of No Surprises Act dispute resolution
A new federal rule aims to unclog the surprise-billing arbitration system, cutting filing fees from $115 to $15 and making it easier to bundle claims.
The Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), along with the Labor and Treasury Departments, finalized a rule Thursday reforming the Federal Independent Dispute Resolution (IDR) process used to settle out-of-network payment disputes between clinicians and insurers. The system has been overwhelmed, seeing more than 5 million disputes since it launched in 2022, far beyond what regulators expected, with each side accusing the other of gaming it. 
The rule drops the administrative fee from $115 to $15 per party, makes it easier to batch multiple claims into a single dispute, requires insurers to use standardized claim codes and lays the groundwork for a new centralized "IDR Gateway" portal rolling out in phases this year. Federal data shows the billing side — clinicians, hospitals and staffing firms — has won roughly 88% of arbitration decisions, a track record insurers cite in pushing for reform. Regulators estimate the changes will save the IDR process nearly $80 million over five years and cut more than $500 million in administrative fees across the two sides.
U.S. uninsured rate holds near 8% — but Medicaid cuts and lapsing ACA subsidies could reverse the trend
New CDC data puts the 2025 uninsured rate near historic lows, even as analysts predict a climb and some patients turn to cheaper, non-ACA coverage.
About 8% of Americans, or roughly one in twelve, lacked health insurance in 2025, holding steady near historic lows, according to new CDC survey data and reporting by The Associated Press. Analysts expect that to shift: last year's Medicaid cuts could add some 10 million people to the uninsured rolls over a decade, per Congressional Budget Office estimates, and the expiration of enhanced Affordable Care Act (ACA) subsidies is already pushing down marketplace enrollment for 2026. 
As those subsidies lapse and premiums spike, KFF Health News reports that some patients are dropping ACA coverage for cheaper alternatives, including short-term policies, fixed-indemnity plans and faith-based "health care sharing ministries." Those options carry lower premiums, and supporters call them a lifeline for people priced out of the marketplace, but they aren't required to meet ACA standards, and critics warn patients may discover only after filing a claim that it won't be covered. For practices, it adds up to a patient population increasingly likely to walk in with gaps in coverage.
Advertisement
Related to this article
View more
October 5th, 2026
What MGMA's fight over downcoding and prior authorization means for physicians
Medical Economics spoke with MGMA's Madison Hynes about the association's draft bill to ban automatic downcoding, the Patients First Act and AI-run prior authorization in traditional Medicare.
Read more
October 1st, 2026
The 10 biggest federal policy threats facing physicians in 2027
From a same-day payment cut to AI-run prior authorization in traditional Medicare, MGMA's government affairs team laid out what Washington has in store for physicians next year.
Read more
October 1st, 2026
Why underpaying primary care costs the whole system
Nearly 54 percent lower costs for adults with chronic disease. Four experts on why primary care still gets under 5% of health care spending.
Read more
October 6th, 2026
10 biggest takeaways for physicians from MGMA's 100th annual conference
From AI scribes and coding habits to the claims payers quietly cut, these are the lessons physicians can take from four days of sessions and interviews at the Medical Group Management Association's centennial meeting.
Read more
October 5th, 2026
From skin scan to prescription: AI acne prescribing launches in Utah
Nolla Health claims it has the nation’s first approval for artificial intelligence to issue initial prescriptions. Physician review comes later.
Read more
October 2nd, 2026
Same drug, double the bill: What commercial site-neutral payment could mean for physician practices
EBRI data show employer plans pay hospital outpatient departments about twice what physician offices receive for the same physician-administered drugs, and the commercial market has barely begun to address the gap.
Read more
October 1st, 2026
Six physician groups push back on claims that AI is better informed than doctors
The American Medical Association and five specialty societies say casting AI as smarter than physicians diminishes their expertise, a day after the health secretary praised AI second opinions.
Read more
September 30th, 2026
Practice leaders describe turning away Medicare patients as pay lags costs
MGMA members described capping Medicare Advantage contracts and favoring commercial patients, while one Texas practice leader reluctantly called Medicare her best payer.
Read more
Previous slideNext slide
Advertisement
Advertisement
Trending on Medical Economics
1
U.S. health care's 'tragedy of the commons' leaves primary care 20% short by 2038, Trilliant Health report finds
2
The physician's future: A profession rewritten
3
The best hotel rewards programs for conference season, ranked
4
From skin scan to prescription: AI acne prescribing launches in Utah
5
10 ways health care is working against physicians
