SOURCE: https://medicalliabilitymonitor.com/
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T01:55:25+08:00
META: {"article:modified_time": "2021-10-08T16:29:55+00:00", "og:title": "Latest Medical Malpractice News | Medical Liability Monitor", "og:description": "Medical Liability Monitor reports on the medical malpractice insurance industry. Subscribe today for the latest medical malpractice news.", "datePublished": "2018-05-11T06:15:37+00:00", "dateModified": "2021-10-08T16:29:55+00:00"}

Latest Medical Malpractice News | Medical Liability Monitor
 ×
Medical Liability Monitor News
Stay up-to-date on the medical malpractice industry news that affects you.
First Name
Last Name
E-mail
Profession
AttorneyHealthcare providerJournalistMPL executiveProducerRisk managerUnderwriterOther
Which number is bigger, 2 or 18? 
**We hate spam as much as you do!
We will never sell your info... period!
Please leave this field empty.
Δ
follow us
Medical Liability
Monitor
Publishing news about malpractice issues since 1975
Publishing news about
malpractice issues since 1975
 Start your subscription now
 Start your subscription
now
Welcome
Medical Liability Monitor is the only independent source of reliable coverage and fresh perspectives on the medical professional liability (medical malpractice) insurance industry. Our monthly newsletter reports all the critical business happenings as well as political, legal and risk management issues that affect the healthcare industry’s risk profile. No other source offers the latest information on medical professional liability insurance premium rates and trends, tort reform, significant jury verdicts and what’s happening with medical malpractice insurers across the nation.
Annual Rate Survey
Medical Liability Monitor subscribers receive our special Annual Rate Survey issue every October. The Annual Rate Survey breaks down nationwide trends in physician malpractice costs as well as catalogs mature, base-rate medical liability insurance premiums — state-by-state, county-by-county — for every medical malpractice insurer of consequence. Our readers consider this exclusive survey an invaluable resource, referring to its information throughout the year.
Quarterly Analysis
Four times a year, Medical Liability Monitor publishes an analysis of the financial results for a large composite of medical professional liability insurance companies compiled by the international actuarial and consulting firm Milliman Inc. This quarterly analysis looks at the MPL industry’s current financial health within the context of its historical outcomes in order to recognize trends and forecast the industry’s future.
Subscribe now
Subscribe today! We look forward to keeping you ahead of the curve.
 Subscribe Now
 Subscribe Now
Curious
About our
Rate
Survey?
Coverage and fresh perspectives on the medical professional liability insurance market.
Healthcare
Matters
Video Series
Video Series of Coverage and fresh perspectives on the medical professional liability insurance market.
Join our
Mpli
Webinars
Medical professional liability insurance market.
Executives Share Benefits of Subscribing
Brian Atchinson,
 Medical Professional Liability Association president and CEO
Medical Liability Monitor is a must-read for anyone with an interest in the medical professional liability insurance industry. I consistently turn to the publication for news and insight on the topics that are important and relevant to me. Medical Liability Monitor is a tremendous value and is certainly among my go-to sources for information on the medical professional liability insurance marketplace.” 
Chad Karls,
Milliman Inc. principal and consulting actuary
The most recent edition of the Medical Liability Monitor is always within reach on my desk as it provides timely and pertinent information on the medical professional liability market. The articles are well written and concise and help me keep up with the ever changing marketplace.”
Sarah Pacini,
 Cooperative of American Physicians CEO
Medical Liability Monitor is the premier resource on the latest news and trends in medical professional liability insurance. Each issue provides me with valuable insights and perspective from leading experts in our industry. Medical Liability Monitor is essential reading at our office.”
Stay up to date about malpractice
CNA/HPSO Study Finds Physical Therapy Claim Severity Up 20%
October 7, 2026 
 by 
 matray
Physical therapy professional liability claim severity increased more than 20% in CNA and HPSO's latest closed-claims analysis, with the study also showing a shift toward higher indemnity payments. The Physical Therapy Professional Liability Claim Report: 5th Edition examines claims involving physical therapists, physical therapist assistants and physical therapy practices that closed from 2020 through 2025. ...
Illinois Appeals Court: Disability Tolled Malpractice Statutes of Limitation, Repose
October 6, 2026 
 by 
 matray
An Illinois appellate court upheld a multimillion-dollar medical malpractice verdict, ruling that a patient’s catastrophic stroke and resulting legal disability tolled both the state’s two-year statute of limitations and four-year statute of repose. The court rejected the argument that the ability of the patient’s wife to sue on his behalf ended the tolling, finding that ...
Utah Expands AI Healthcare Experiment Beyond Prescription Renewals
October 6, 2026 
 by 
 matray
Utah regulators are expanding a groundbreaking experiment that permits artificial intelligence to perform clinical functions traditionally reserved for licensed healthcare professionals, moving beyond prescription renewals into new prescriptions and treatment planning while building a broader regulatory framework for the technology. The latest approvals show that Utah’s first AI prescription-renewal experiment with Doctronic was not a ...
 check out all our blog posts
Medical Liability Monitor
7234 W. North Ave. — Suite 101
Elmwood Park, Illinois 60707
editor@medicalliabilitymonitor.com
@MedMalMonitor
312-944-7900
Medical liability monitor
© 2026 All rights reserved
Home
Rate Survey
Subscribe
Blog
Submit PR
About Us
Contact Us
follow us
 Member, Beacon International Group, Ltd.
