SOURCE: https://oecd.ai/en/incidents/2026-10-05-b6c9
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T01:56:12+08:00
META: {"og:title": "Utah Approves AI System for Automated Acne Prescriptions", "og:description": "Utah has authorized Nolla Health's AI system to independently prescribe acne treatments via its app, marking the first U.S. approval for AI-driven, end-to-end medical prescriptions. The pilot program starts with physician oversight but plans to reduce human involvement, raising concerns about potential health risks from AI-driven clinical decisions."}

Utah Approves AI System for Automated Acne Prescriptions - OECD.AI
AI Risk & Accountability
 AI has risks and all actors must be accountable. 
AI, Data & Privacy
 Data and privacy are primary policy issues for AI. 
Generative AI
 Managing the risks and benefits of generative AI. 
Future of Work
 How AI can and will affect workers and working environments 
AI Index
 The OECD AI will be a synthetic measurement framework on Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
AI Incidents
 To manage risks, governments must track and understand AI incidents and hazards. 
AI in Government
 Governments are not only AI regulators and investors, but also developers and users. 
Data Governance
 Expertise on data governance to promote its safe and faire use in AI 
Responsible AI
 The responsible development, use and governance of human-centred AI systems 
Innovation & Commercialisation
 How to drive cooperation on AI and transfer research results into products 
AI Compute
 AI computing capacities and their environmental impact. 
AI & Health
 AI can help health systems overcome their most urgent challenges. 
AI Futures
AI’s potential futures.
WIPS
 Programme on Work, Innovation, Productivity and Skills in AI. 
AI Policy Toolkit
 Map your AI policy landscape, identify priorities and explore policy examples 
Catalogue Tools & Metrics
 Explore tools & metrics to build and deploy AI systems that are trustworthy. 
AIM: AI Incidents and Hazards Monitor
 Gain valuable insights on global AI incidents and hazards. 
The Hiroshima AI Reporting Framework
 Organisations developing advanced AI systems can participate by submitting a report. By sharing information, they will facilitate transparency and comparability of risk mitigation measures. 
OECD AI Principles
 The first IGO standard to promote innovative and trustworthy AI 
Policy areas
 Browse OECD work related to AI across policy areas. 
Papers & Publications
 OECD and GPAI publications on AI, including the OECD AI Papers Series. 
Videos
 Watch videos about AI policy the issues that matter most. 
Context
 AI is already a crucial part of most people’s daily routines. 
About OECD.AI
 OECD.AI is an online interactive platform dedicated to promoting trustworthy, human-centric AI. 
About GPAI
 The GPAI initiative and OECD member countries’ work on AI joined forces under the GPAI brand to create an integrated partnership. 
Community of Experts
 Experts from around the world advise GPAI and contribute to its work. 
Partners
 OECD.AI works closely with many partners. 
 Utah Approves AI System for Automated Acne Prescriptions 
 The information displayed in the AIM should not be reported as representing the official views of the OECD or of its member countries. 
Utah has authorized Nolla Health's AI system to independently prescribe acne treatments via its app, marking the first U.S. approval for AI-driven, end-to-end medical prescriptions. The pilot program starts with physician oversight but plans to reduce human involvement, raising concerns about potential health risks from AI-driven clinical decisions.[AI generated]
 Why's our monitor labelling this an incident or hazard? 
The AI system is explicitly involved in prescribing medication, a healthcare decision that directly affects patient health. Although no harm is reported, the autonomous nature of the AI prescribing without human oversight introduces a credible risk of injury or harm to patients if the AI malfunctions or errs. This fits the definition of an AI Hazard, as the event plausibly could lead to harm but no incident has yet occurred.[AI generated]
AI principles
SafetyAccountability
Industries
Healthcare, drugs, and biotechnology
Affected stakeholders
Consumers
Harm types
Physical (injury)
Business function:
Other
AI system task:
Goal-driven organisation
Articles about this incident or hazard
No Doctor Needed: In Utah, AI Can Help You Zap Your Zits
2026-10-05
 Bloomberg Business 
Why's our monitor labelling this an incident or hazard?
Utah Pilots AI-Only Examination and Prescription Process for Certain Patients
2026-10-06
 Gizmodo 
Why's our monitor labelling this an incident or hazard?
Utah Approved the First Autonomous Prescription System. It Starts With Acne, but 3 Conditions Could Follow
2026-10-05
 Inc. 
Why's our monitor labelling this an incident or hazard?
AI just got a green light to prescribe drugs -- at least in one state
2026-10-06
 Conservative News Today 
Why's our monitor labelling this an incident or hazard?
Utah gives startup Nolla Health permission to start issuing AI automated prescriptions for acne treatments
2026-10-06
 SiliconANGLE 
Why's our monitor labelling this an incident or hazard?
 Receive the OECD's artificial intelligence newsletter! 
Sign up with Linkedin
