SOURCE: https://www.techbuzznews.com/utah-adds-healthcare-pillar-to-pro-human-ai-initiative/
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T02:03:22+08:00
META: {"article:published_time": "2026-10-05T21:32:44.000Z", "article:modified_time": "2026-10-06T20:38:59.000Z", "og:title": "Utah Adds Healthcare Pillar to Pro-Human AI Initiative, Names Six Independent Evaluators", "og:description": "Utah added a Healthcare pillar to its Pro-Human AI Initiative, signed six independent third-party evaluators, and approved five healthcare sandbox pilots, including University of Utah Health, Intermountain Health, Nolla Health, Expect Fitness, and August AI.", "datePublished": "2026-10-05T21:32:44.000Z", "dateModified": "2026-10-06T20:38:59.000Z"}

Utah Adds Healthcare Pillar to Pro-Human AI Initiative, Names Six Independent Evaluators - TechBuzz News
 Search
 Sign in
 Subscribe 
 Home
 About
 -Article Categories
 -Article Categories--All Categories
 -Article Categories--Tech News
 -Article Categories--Ecosystem
 -Article Categories--People & Culture
 -Article Categories--Startup 101
 -Article Categories--Money
 -Article Categories--HR & Management Series
 Authors
 -Data
 -Data--Wave Charts
 -Data--K2 Utah Tech Almanac
 Subscribe & Advertise
 Support
 Subscribe 
Announcement
 Participants gather for a group photo following the Pro-Human AI Initiative healthcare announcement at the Utah State Capitol, October 5, 2026. Photo; Utah Department of Commerce
Salt Lake City, Utah — October 5, 2026
Utah is extending its Pro-Human AI Initiative into healthcare, adding a dedicated Healthcare pillar, a new Taskforce member, and an independent evaluation network meant to check the claims of companies testing clinical AI in the state.
The announcement, made at the State Capitol today by the Pro-Human AI Taskforce and the Utah Department of Commerce's Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy (OAIP), also brings five new regulatory mitigation agreements into the state's regulatory sandbox. 
Tracy Gruber, Commissioner of the Utah Department of Health and Human Services, joins the Taskforce as part of the expansion.
The Pro-Human AI Initiative was initially announced by Governor Spencer Cox at the 2025 Utah AI Summit on December 3, 2025.
Taskforce co-chair and Commerce Commissioner Margaret Woolley Busse said the Healthcare pillar is "pivotal" as the state navigates AI in healthcare, and described OAIP as building a model framework that pairs better outcomes with oversight and accountability.
Margaret Woolley Busse, Commissioner of the Utah Department of Commerce and co-chair of the Pro-Human AI Taskforce, speaks at the Pro-Human AI Initiative press conference at the Utah State Capitol, October 5, 2026. Photo; Utah Department of Commerce
OAIP Director Zach Boyd said the office's foundational approach is that technical innovation will never supersede patient safety. He described the sandbox's basic model as "innovating, measuring, independently verifying, and adjusting as needed." Bringing independent evaluators into the process, he said, is meant to ensure AI developers' claims are verified rather than self-reported.
Zach Boyd, Director of the Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy: "Our foundational approach is that technical innovation will never supersede patient safety." Pro-Human AI Taskforce, State Capitol, October 5, 2026. Photo; Utah Department of Commerce
Gruber said the goal isn't adoption for its own sake. "The success is not deploying the most AI, which may surprise some in this room," she said. "The success is better, more accessible, more affordable healthcare for our Utah population."
Tracy Gruber, Commissioner of the Utah Department of Health and Human Services and the newest member of the Pro-Human AI Taskforce, October 5, 2026. Photo; Utah Department of Commerce
Six third-party evaluators
OAIP has signed agreements with six independent organizations that will validate technical attestations from sandbox participants, audit accuracy in AI decision reporting, and provide independent clinical evaluations against established medical standards:
Coalition for Health AI (CHAI)
Clarion AI Partners
Glacis Technologies
mpathic AI
Vega Health
Stanford Clinical Excellence Research Center
Mark Sendak, CEO of Vega Health, said the evaluators will match their work to each use case, asking what benefit is expected, what the failure modes are, and what evidence would change the decision to approve a product. "Clinical tools are higher stakes and they need stronger evidence to earn the trust of health systems and patients," he said. He emphasized that evaluators advise but don't decide: "All decisions about what to include in the sandbox will remain with the state."
Boyd said the state wants the evaluator list to grow. "We want to grow a market of these third-party evaluators," he said, noting that future sandbox participants can propose their own evaluators for state approval.
Nirav Shah, speaking for the Clinical AI Advisory Network, framed Utah's approach against the broader landscape. "The rest of the world is seeing uncontrolled experiments with AI," he said. "What Utah is doing is we're figuring it out together with industry, with regulators."
Five new pilot agreements
The regulatory mitigation agreements are one-to-three-year pilots that let organizations gather real-world safety and efficacy data for clinical AI tools in controlled settings:
University of Utah Health and Intermountain Health received umbrella agreements that create expedited review pathways for future pilots, each of which will still be individually vetted.
Nolla Health will pilot AI-assisted visual evaluation and treatment pathways for mild-to-moderate acne, under specialist oversight. Based in New York City, Nolla Health is an AI-powered healthcare company that uses AI and clinician oversight to provide personalized diagnosis, treatment and prescriptions, starting with skin health and acne care.
Expect Fitness will offer an AI-enabled physical therapy pathway for women dealing with postpartum recovery, urinary incontinence, and pelvic health issues. Expect Fitness is a New York-based digital health and fitness company offering OB/GYN-approved prenatal and postnatal workouts, including strength, cardio, yoga, Pilates and pelvic-floor training through its app
August AI received a stage-gated pilot for refills of routine, non-controlled chronic disease medications, with required human physician review before any prescription is authorized. August AI is a Bengaluru-based health-tech company building an AI health companion that helps users understand symptoms, interpret lab reports and prescriptions, and navigate health information between doctor visits.
Dan Liljenquist, Chief Strategy Officer at Intermountain Health, speaks at the Pro-Human AI Initiative press conference at the Utah State Capitol, October 5, 2026. Intermountain Health was approved for an umbrella agreement that creates expedited review pathways for future healthcare AI pilots. Photo; Utah Department of Commerce
Dan Liljenquist, Chief Strategy Officer at Intermountain Health, said the system has more than 300 AI initiatives underway, most of them administrative, and has not yet chosen its first sandbox pilots. The sandbox, he said, lets Intermountain test AI at "those edges that require licensure from the state." His guardrail: "AI should support clinical judgment, not replace it."
Jim Hotaling, Chief Innovation Officer at U of U Health, described a case in which an AI tool flagged a family history of sudden cardiac death buried in some 2,000 pages of patient notes, leading to a procedure for a potentially lethal arrhythmia. "The goal is not to take the human out of the loop," he said. "The goal is to actually make the human a better human and better able to take care of patients." He also cited an internal survey in which about 80% of 5,000 responding patients said they use AI for their healthcare, but only about half were comfortable with its responses.
Jim Hotaling, Chief Innovation Officer at U of U Health, speaking at the Pro-Human AI Initiative press conference, Utah State Capitol, October 5, 2026. Photo; Utah Department of Commerce
Safeguards
The pilots fall under multi-layered oversight in coordination with the Division of Professional Licensing (DOPL). Participants must give patients clear AI disclosures, carry specialty medical malpractice insurance, run under 24-hour incident response plans, and preserve patients' traditional legal remedies.
Data from the pilots will be shared with the Utah Legislature and the public to inform future permanent, evidence-based healthcare regulations.
Federal oversight and liability
In a separate statement, OAIP said the agreements apply only to Utah's state professional practice laws and administrative rules. The office said the pilots are designed to "complement, rather than disrupt, federal authority" and do not interfere with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration's jurisdiction over medical products, software, and devices. OAIP said it will keep coordinating with federal partners.
The office also said the agreements do not waive, reduce, or shield participating companies or supervising clinicians from civil, criminal, or medical malpractice liability. Patient protections, standard-of-care expectations, and legal remedies remain intact for every authorized pilot.
Learn more at commerce.utah.gov/ai/.
For further reading, see pdf below: Evidentiary Expectations for Healthcare AI Sandbox. Published by the Utah Department of Commerce Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy (OAIP), outlining clinical safety, evaluation staging, and public health benefit requirements for healthcare AI applicants. August 2026. Authors: Alice Schwarze and Zach Boyd.
Evidentiary Expectations for Healthcare AI Sandbox
Evidentiary Expectations for Healthcare AI Sandbox.pdf
365 KB
 Share this article
 The link has been copied!
 Featured Articles
 From an Accidentally Ruined Lab to a $900 Million Pallet Deal: Inside Terraphene and Its Bet on Hemp
 Sep 03, 2026
 Fortem Lands DHS Prime Contractor Slot on $1 Billion + Counter-Drone Contract
 Aug 04, 2026
 Obra Launches to Put Job Seekers First in an AI-Chaotic Hiring Market
 Jul 29, 2026
 Domo to Sell Operating Business to Progress Software in $400 Million Deal
 Jul 22, 2026
 Subscribe to our newsletter
 Get all the latest news delivered straight to your inbox.
 Subscribe
 No spam. Unsubscribe anytime.
 Processing your request...
 Please check your inbox and click the link to confirm your subscription.
 Your link has expired. Please request a new one.
 Your link has expired. Please request a new one.
 Your link has expired. Please request a new one.
 Great! You've successfully signed up.
 Great! You've successfully signed up.
 Welcome back! You've successfully signed in.
 Success! You now have access to additional content.
