SOURCE: https://www.utahbusiness.com/industry/2026/10/06/utah-becomes-first-state-to-authorize-ai-to-issue-initial-prescriptions/
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T01:53:32+08:00
META: {"article:published_time": "2026-10-06T22:35:20.688Z", "article:modified_time": "2026-10-06T22:35:25.406Z", "og:title": "Utah becomes first state to authorize AI to issue initial prescriptions", "og:description": "Nolla Health’s AI is authorized to issue initial acne prescriptions in Utah under physician oversight, after another company’s pilot drew criticism.", "datePublished": "2026-10-06T22:35:20.688Z", "dateModified": "2026-10-06T22:35:25.406Z"}

Utah becomes first state to authorize AI to issue initial prescriptions – Utah Business
Healthcare & Life Sciences
Share
Utah becomes first state to authorize AI to issue initial prescriptions
Nolla Health’s AI is authorized to issue initial acne prescriptions in Utah under physician oversight, after another company’s prescription-refill pilot drew criticism from the state medical board.
Edited and Reviewed By 
Ashley Okawa
//Oct 6, 2026
See More Utah Business Stories In Search
Share
Adobe Stock 
Nolla Health announced it has become the first company in the country authorized to let an AI system issue an initial prescription, launching an acne treatment pilot exclusively in Utah. The New York-based startup’s Nolla Derm app scans a patient’s face and uses an intake questionnaire to develop a treatment plan. The pilot authorizes AI-issued initial prescriptions for eligible patients under defined protocols and physician oversight.
Nolla cited gaps in access to dermatology care as a motivation for the pilot. According to the company, an estimated 100,000 Utahns have active acne at any given time, but only 10% ever see a dermatologist. Nolla put the average appointment wait in Utah at 61 days — nearly twice the national median — and said 11 counties have no dermatologists. Visits can cost up to $300, the company said, while delayed treatment can allow acne to progress to permanent scarring and increase future treatment costs.
The approval followed months of work with the Utah Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy, the state agency that grants companies temporary relief from licensing rules to test AI products under physician oversight. Eligible Utah residents 18 and older can download the Nolla Derm app and opt into the program for a discounted rate of $4.99 a month, completing a 10- to 15-minute intake questionnaire and a face scan before receiving a personalized treatment plan.
A narrower bet after a rockier pilot
The authorization follows Utah’s earlier AI prescription-renewal pilots with Doctronic and Legion Health. The state’s earlier pilot with Doctronic let AI approve prescription refills, and it drew a formal letter from the Utah Medical Licensing Board, which said that oversight of “prescription refills is a task reserved for properly licensed medical practitioners for critical safety and clinical reasons,” stating the agreement was signed “without consulting the Medical Board.” The state declined the board’s recommendation to suspend the pilot. Doctronic’s tool, by contrast, can only renew prescriptions already written by a licensed provider for 30-, 60- or 90-day periods; it never writes a first prescription under the pilot.
Nolla’s deal looks built to avoid a repeat debate. The company said it met and worked directly with the Utah Medical Board ahead of launch to reflect the board’s feedback in the final program — a notable contrast to how Doctronic’s agreement landed. Physician oversight remains part of the pilot, and cases the AI cannot confidently handle are referred to a licensed physician.
“AI will matter most in healthcare when it helps people get care they otherwise would not receive,” says Luis Wenus, co-founder and CEO at Nolla Health. “With Nolla Derm, we are showing how AI can responsibly expand that access and help someone get personalized treatment in minutes instead of long waits or going without care altogether.”
Zach Boyd, director of the Utah Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy, frames the pilot as validation of the state’s approach. “The Nolla Health pilot program represents a significant step forward in leveraging AI to improve healthcare access for Utahns, while maintaining rigorous oversight and safety,” Boyd says. “Our Office facilitates innovative AI solutions while ensuring that public health and patient safety remain paramount.”
A testing ground beyond one condition
The office, launched in July 2024 to help facilitate collaboration between lawmakers and AI businesses in the state, has now backed pilots spanning a teen mental-health chatbot and Doctronic’s refill tool, positioning Utah as a testing ground for AI’s role in direct patient care.
New York-headquartered Nolla Health raised $4.5 million in a funding round led by General Catalyst. The company says its Nolla Derm app has been downloaded by more than 175,000 people across 44 states, though the AI-prescribing pilot is exclusive to Utah. The company says licensed clinicians agree with the AI’s treatment selections in over 96% of real-world cases.
Whether the model expands beyond acne, or beyond Utah, will likely hinge on how the physician-review data holds up under the same scrutiny that followed Doctronic.
This article was adapted from a press release by an automated tool and reviewed and edited by an editor for accuracy before publication.
Ashley Okawa is the managing editor of Utah Business.
Subscribe
