SOURCE: https://utahpolicy.com/news-release/78402-utah-enhances-pro-human-ai-initiative-with-new-healthcare-pillar
FETCHED_BJ: 2026-10-08T02:03:20+08:00
META: {"article:published_time": "2026-10-06T14:20:02+00:00", "article:modified_time": "2026-10-06T14:20:04+00:00", "og:title": "Utah enhances pro-human AI initiative with new healthcare pillar - Utah Policy", "og:description": "In a groundbreaking announcement today, Utah and its Pro-Human AI Taskforce unveiled the addition of a Healthcare pillar to its Pro-Human AI Initiative and new Taskforce member, Tracy Gruber, Commissioner of the Utah Department of Health and Human Services. The new pillar marks a significant advancement in the state’s commitment to responsible AI innovation. This advancement involves expanding the regulatory sandbox’s capabilities and participants within the Utah Department of Commerce’s Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy (OAIP),accompanied by timely policy recommendations and milestones to […]", "datePublished": "2026-10-06T14:20:02+00:00", "dateModified": "2026-10-06T14:20:04+00:00"}

Utah enhances pro-human AI initiative with new healthcare pillar - Utah Policy
News Release
Utah enhances pro-human AI initiative with new healthcare pillar
News Release·October 6, 2026·
Share
In a groundbreaking announcement today, Utah and its Pro-Human AI Taskforce unveiled the addition of a Healthcare pillar to its Pro-Human AI Initiative and new Taskforce member, Tracy Gruber, Commissioner of the Utah Department of Health and Human Services. The new pillar marks a significant advancement in the state’s commitment to responsible AI innovation. This advancement involves expanding the regulatory sandbox’s capabilities and participants within the Utah Department of Commerce’s Office of Artificial Intelligence Policy (OAIP),accompanied by timely policy recommendations and milestones to ensure safety and transparency in the development and deployment of healthcare AI technologies.
OAIP’s expansion focuses on launching a new network of independent third-party evaluators to rigorously assess and verify each sandbox pilot, as well as authorizing new regulatory mitigation agreements with healthcare providers and digital health companies.
“Establishing the Healthcare pillar within the Pro-Human AI Initiative is pivotal as we navigate the complexities of AI in healthcare,” stated Pro-Human AI Taskforce co-chair and Utah Department of Commerce Commissioner Margaret Woolley Busse. “The Office of AI Policy is creating a model framework where AI can enhance healthcare outcomes while ensuring robust oversight and accountability. With these advancements, we are paving the way for a future where AI serves humanity, prioritizing patient safety and public trust.”
As the national discussion around AI grows, Utah has established a proactive model for data-driven accountability. Rather than relying solely on companies’ self-reported claims, OAIP is embedding independent technical and health system evaluators directly into the state’s oversight framework, ensuring that healthcare AI remains human-guided from pilot through deployment.
“Our foundational approach is that technical innovation will never supersede patient safety,” said Zach Boyd, Director of OAIP. “By integrating independent third-party clinical evaluators directly into our process, we ensure that every claim made by AI developers is independently verified. Every pilot remains under strict state oversight, and every deployment prioritizes Utahns’ health and well-being.”
Third-Party Evaluator Network
 To guarantee trust, algorithmic transparency, and clinical efficacy, OAIP has signed agreements with six independent third-party evaluators. These organizations will assist state regulators by validating technical attestations made by sandbox participants, auditing accuracy in AI decision reporting, and providing independent clinical evaluations for alignment with established medical standards. The evaluators include:
● Coalition for Health AI (CHAI)
● Clarion AI Partners
● Glacis Technologies
● mpathic AI
● Vega Health
● Stanford Clinical Excellence Research Center
New Regulatory Mitigation Agreements
OAIP has also announced five regulatory mitigation agreements (one to three-year pilots) across various healthcare delivery areas. These agreements allow participating organizations to create controlled environments to gather real-world safety and efficacy data for clinical AI tools. Participating organizations include:
University of Utah Health and Intermountain Health were both approved for umbrella agreements to establish expedited review pathways for future, individually vetted healthcare AI pilots.
 Nolla Health was approved for a targeted pilot to assess AI-assisted visual evaluations and treatment pathways for mild-to-moderate acne, under specialist oversight.
Expect Fitness was approved for an AI-enabled physical therapy pathway to support women experiencing postpartum recovery, urinary incontinence, and pelvic health issues.
August AI was approved for a stage-gated pilot for prescription refills of routine, non-controlled chronic disease medications, maintaining strict requirements for human physician review before prescriptions are authorized.
These pilots are subject to multi-layered state oversight in coordination with the Department of Commerce’s Division of Professional Licensing (DOPL). Participating organizations must enforce clear patient AI disclosures, maintain specialty medical malpractice insurance, operate under strict 24-hour incident response plans, and preserve traditional legal remedies for patients.
Data gathered throughout these pilots will be shared with the Utah Legislature and the public to inform future, permanent, evidence-based healthcare regulations.
Popular
Understanding Utah’s child abuse reporting law
I wasn’t worried about ChatGPT until I tried ChatGPT
Getting to The Point with Rep. Lowry Snow
HJR2 is an attack on the Judicial Branch
Biden’s signature on marriage act is vindication of the Utah compromise
Latest from Utah Policy
HJR2 is an attack on the Judicial Branch
These principles and institutions should be a measuring stick for lawmakers and voters
2023 Legislative Priorities with Derek Miller
I wasn’t worried about ChatGPT until I tried ChatGPT
Biden’s signature on marriage act is vindication of the Utah compromise
Search Utah Policy
 Start typing to see results or hit ESC to close 
Today At Utah Policy
Featured Articles
Wise Words
Lighter Side
Local Headline
See all results
Subscribe Now
Raising Our Political IQ. Stay in the loop when you subscribe for free.
