 
 Mistral’s new 1T model aims to leapfrog closed and open rivals | TechCrunch 
 &#8211;:&#8211;:&#8211;:&#8211; 
 Last day to exhibit your breakthrough to 10,000+ tech leaders at Disrupt is on Oct 2 . Book Exhibit Table Now. 
 Disrupt doors open Oct. 13. Get your pass and bring someone with you at 50% off. REGISTER NOW. 
 Close 
 TechCrunch Desktop Logo 
 TechCrunch Mobile Logo 
 Latest 
 Startups 
 Venture 
 Apple 
 Security 
 AI 
 Apps 
 Disrupt 2026 
 Events 
 Podcasts 
 Newsletters 
 Search Submit 
 Site Search Toggle 
 Mega Menu Toggle 
 Topics
 Latest 
 AI 
 Amazon 
 Apps 
 Biotech & Health 
 Climate 
 Cloud Computing 
 Commerce 
 Crypto 
 Enterprise 
 EVs 
 Fintech 
 Fundraising 
 Gadgets 
 Gaming 
 Google 
 Government & Policy 
 Hardware 
 Instagram 
 Layoffs 
 Media & Entertainment 
 Meta 
 Microsoft 
 Privacy 
 Robotics 
 Security 
 Social 
 Space 
 Startups 
 TikTok 
 Transportation 
 Venture 
 More from TechCrunch
 Staff 
 Events 
 Startup Battlefield 
 StrictlyVC 
 Newsletters 
 Podcasts 
 Videos 
 Partner Content 
 TechCrunch Brand Studio 
 Contact Us 
 Image Credits: Photo by Thomas Fuller/NurPhoto / Getty Images 
 AI 
 Mistral’s new 1T model aims to leapfrog closed and open rivals
 Anna Heim 
 7:33 AM PDT · October 6, 2026 
 The race between open and closed AI is on, and Europe is still in the mix. On Tuesday, French AI lab Mistral AI released Mistral Large 4 (ML4), a new large multimodal model aiming to leapfrog both American and Chinese rivals — following what French president Macron described as “a third way in AI.”
 Amid a growing divide between closed models that can be unplugged and open models that are often made in China, Mistral is positioning ML4 as an alternative to both. Nicknamed Le Chonk in reference to its 1 trillion parameters, ML4 is definitely not small; but is not an open-weight model yet. For the time being, it can only be accessed via a public guardrail endpoint, but Mistral plans to make its weights available in just three weeks, after safety testing is complete.
 “In the meantime, we&#8217;ll work with trusted partners and governments to make sure that the open source weights can be used to defend, but not to [perform] malicious attacks,” Mistral VP Science Pierre Stock told TechCrunch. 
 Security concerns have been mounting in recent months, particularly among Mistral’s core audience — enterprises and institutions. At the same time, an open-weight model is easier to audit, Stock said.
 Another important behind-the-scenes aspect is that ML4 was trained entirely on Mistral’s compute; using only 4,000 Nvidia GPUs “which is two to three times less than our Chinese competitors, and significantly less than the closed source competitors,” Stock said.
 With benchmark results still pending, Mistral hopes ML4 will be best in class among open-weight models, especially outside of China, but not only, Stock said. Thanks to focused training, it could also outperform closed models in specific areas that are key to its customers, and where multimodal capabilities can add value.
 According to Stock, ML4’s optimized use cases include cybersecurity and finance, but also chip design, which is core to two of Mistral’s main backers — Dutch giant ASML, which led its Series C , and Samsung, which led its Series D last month at a €21 billion valuation (about $24.39 billion).
 At the time, the company tried to convey that its decision to host Chinese models wasn’t a pivot into becoming a mere inference provider . With Le Chonk in its corner, the company believes it should still be considered a frontier lab as well.
 Topics
 AI , ai models , Europe , France , Mistral AI 
 When you purchase through links in our articles, we may earn a small commission . This doesn’t affect our editorial independence. 
 Anna Heim 
 Freelance Reporter 
 Anna Heim is a writer and editorial consultant.
 You can contact or verify outreach from Anna by emailing annatechcrunch [at] gmail.com.
 As a freelance reporter at TechCrunch since 2021, she has covered a large range of startup-related topics including AI, fintech & insurtech, SaaS & pricing, and global venture capital trends.
 As of May 2025, her reporting for TechCrunch focuses on Europe’s most interesting startup stories.
 Anna has moderated panels and conducted onstage interviews at industry events of all sizes, including major tech conferences such as TechCrunch Disrupt, 4YFN, South Summit, TNW Conference, VivaTech, and many more.
 A former LATAM & Media Editor at The Next Web, startup founder and Sciences Po Paris alum, she’s fluent in multiple languages, including French, English, Spanish and Brazilian Portuguese.
 View Bio 
 October 13 &#8211; 15
 San Francisco
 Get 50% off a second pass The Disrupt experience is meant to be shared. Get your pass and bring a colleague, partner, or peer at 50% off. Cover more ground by making connections, building momentum, and discovering what’s next in the startup ecosystem.
 BOOK NOW 
 Most Popular
 Healthleap raises $38M for its AI that flags hospital patients who may need a closer look 
 Ram Iyer 
 Bloom raises $3.6M to become the &#8216;Alibaba&#8217; of American manufacturing 
 Sean O&#039;Kane 
 SpaceX alumni nab $100M to rethink shipping with autonomous freight trains 
 Tim De Chant 
 Tony Fadell on why the first wave of AI gadgets failed — and what comes next 
 Amanda Silberling 
 Google experiments with an AI-powered gaming platform 
 Lauren Forristal 
 OpenAI’s Alexander Embiricos is coming to TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 — days after the launch of Dots 
 TechCrunch Events 
 Get hands-on: The full lineup of interactive roundtables at TechCrunch Disrupt 2026 
 TechCrunch Events 
 Loading the next article 
 Error loading the next article 
 X 
 LinkedIn 
 Facebook 
 Instagram 
 youTube 
 Mastodon 
 Threads 
 Bluesky 
 TechCrunch 
 Staff 
 Contact Us 
 Advertise 
 Site Map 
 Terms of Service 
 Privacy Policy 
 RSS Terms of Use 
 Code of Conduct 
 OpenAI 
 Hugging Face 
 Flock 
 Startup Battlefield 
 Disrupt 2026 
 Tech Layoffs 
 ChatGPT 
 © 2026 TechCrunch Media LLC.
