                                            IN THE

           ARIZONA COURT OF APPEALS

                                        DIVISION ONE

                             STATE OF ARIZONA, Appellee,

                                                 v.

                     GABRIEL PAUL HORCASITAS, Appellant.

                                    No. 1 CA-CR 25-0191
                                      FILED 09-30-2026

              Appeal from the Superior Court in Maricopa County
                                  No. CR2021-142720-001

                          The Honorable Todd F. Lang, Judge
     AFFIRMED IN PART; VACATED AND REMANDED IN PART

                                           COUNSEL
Maricopa County Public Defender’s Office, Phoenix
By Kristen Reller
Counsel for Appellant

Arizona Attorney General’s Office, Phoenix
By Gracynthia Claw
Counsel for Appellee

Arizona Voice for Crime Victims, Phoenix
By Colleen Clase, Jessica Gattuso, Thomas E. Lordan
Counsel for Crime Victims
                         STATE v. HORCASITAS
                           Opinion of the Court

                                           OPINION

Presiding Judge D. Steven Williams delivered the Court’s opinion in which
Judge Anni Hill Foster and Vice Chief Judge David D. Weinzweig joined.

W I L L I A M S, Judge:

¶1  Defendant Gabriel Paul Horcasitas shot and killed the victim

during a road rage confrontation. A jury rejected his claim of self-defense

and convicted him of manslaughter. At sentencing, the superior court heard

and relied on an artificial intelligence (“AI”) video rendering of the victim

speaking to his family, the court, and Horcasitas, which the court

characterized as “genuine” and “speaki[ng] from his heart.” We affirm the

conviction, rejecting Horcasitas’s argument that the court erred in

precluding text messages obtained from the victim’s phone. We vacate the

manslaughter sentence and remand for resentencing because the AI video

was not reliable.

    FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND

¶2  While stopped behind a truck at a red light in a busy

intersection, Horcasitas repeatedly honked his car’s horn. State v. Horcasitas,

1 CA-CR 23-0215, 2024 WL 1463390, at *1, ¶ 2 (Ariz. App. Apr. 4, 2024)

(mem. decision) (prior appeal affirming order granting Horcasitas a new

trial). In response, the victim stepped out of the truck, raised his arms, and

began yelling as he approached Horcasitas’s vehicle. Id. Within seconds,

Horcasitas shot and killed the victim. Id.

¶3  During an interview with police the day of the shooting,

Horcasitas recounted that the victim had charged toward his car,

repeatedly threatened to kill him, and grabbed the frame of his open

driver’s-side window, causing him to fear for his life. Contrary to

Horcasitas’s account, several eyewitnesses reported that the victim had not

advanced beyond the rear of his truck when Horcasitas shot him, and no

eyewitness saw the victim touch or reach into Horcasitas’s car.

¶4  The State charged Horcasitas with first-degree felony murder

(Count 1), second-degree murder (Count 2), drive-by shooting (Count 3),

and three counts of endangerment (Counts 4-6, with different alleged

                         2
    STATE v. HORCASITAS
      Opinion of the Court

victims). Id. at ¶ 3. Before trial, Horcasitas disclosed several defenses,
including justification and self-defense. Id.

¶5  Mid-trial, defense counsel learned, through his cross-

examination of a detective, that police had conducted a forensic analysis of

the victim’s cell phone. Id. at ¶ 4. During a subsequent sidebar conference,

defense counsel challenged the State’s failure to disclose the victim’s cell

phone records. Id. The next morning, the State moved for a protective order

addressing the victim’s cell phone. Id. at ¶ 5. As part of its motion, the State

acknowledged that: (1) Arizona Rule of Criminal Procedure (“Rule”) 15.1

compelled the State to disclose the victim’s cell phone records, and (2) those

records may contain exculpatory evidence implicating Brady v. Maryland,

373 U.S. 83 (1963). Horcasitas, 1 CA-CR 23-0215, at *1, ¶ 5. But explaining

that “the victim’s identifying and/or locating information [could not] be

redacted,” the State requested “a protective order limiting disclosure of the

victim’s identifying information.” Id.

¶6  “After discussing the possibility of a mistrial, the superior

court granted the motion for protective order, found a discovery violation

by the State and deferred appropriate sanctions.” Id. at *2, ¶ 8. At the close

of trial, the jury rendered split verdicts, finding Horcasitas: (1) not guilty of

first-degree felony murder, (2) not guilty of second-degree murder but

guilty of the lesser-included offense of manslaughter, (3) not guilty of drive-

by shooting, and (4) guilty of one count of endangerment (Count 5) and not

guilty of the other two endangerment counts. Id. at ¶ 9.

¶7  Horcasitas timely moved for a new trial, asserting that

forensic analysis of the victim’s phone had revealed exculpatory evidence

not previously disclosed by the State, “including texts relating to the

victim’s mental state and tendency to ‘snap’ while driving in the weeks

leading up to the shooting.” Id. at ¶ 10. After oral argument on the motion,

the superior court “found the State had violated its disclosure obligations

under both Brady and Rule 15.1(b)(8)” by withholding the text messages

from the victim’s cell phone that “bolstered Horcasitas’ self-defense and

related justifications.” Id. at ¶ 11. Pointing to Horcasitas’s right “to put on a

complete defense,” the court granted the motion for new trial, vacated the

guilty verdicts, and entered a judgment of acquittal on the first-degree

felony murder, second-degree murder, and drive-by shooting charges as

well as two of the endangerment counts (Counts 4 and 6). Id.

¶8  The State timely appealed. On review, this court affirmed the

superior court’s order. Id. at *5, ¶ 26.

                                          3
     STATE v. HORCASITAS
       Opinion of the Court

¶9   During the months leading up to the second trial, Horcasitas

disclosed his intent to call the victim’s brother-in-law to testify concerning

the victim’s propensity for violence. The State moved to preclude

Horcasitas from introducing any propensity evidence, whether testimonial

or from the victim’s cell phone, arguing such evidence was inadmissible

under Arizona Rules of Evidence (“Evidence Rule”) 403 and 404. Horcasitas

countered that Evidence Rules 404(a)(2) and 405(a) allowed him to present

reputation and opinion evidence concerning the victim’s character for

violence, including text messages sent by the victim’s brother-in-law during

the weeks before the shooting. According to Horcasitas, evidence of the text

messages was also admissible under Evidence Rule 404(b) to show the

victim’s “intent, motive, and absence of mistake.”

¶10  After hearing argument, the superior court granted the State’s

motion in part, precluding the text messages under Evidence Rule 404(b)

because the victim’s other acts were unknown to Horcasitas at the time of

the shooting. Additionally, the court found the text messages inadmissible

under Evidence Rule 403, explaining their probative value was “negligible”

given: (1) the numerous eyewitnesses who would testify that the victim

initiated the confrontation with Horcasitas, and (2) the substantial

possibility the text messages would confuse and mislead the jurors.

¶11  Despite repeated attempts, Horcasitas was unable to serve the

victim’s brother-in-law with a criminal subpoena. But undeterred by the

superior court’s preclusion order, Horcasitas noticed his intent to introduce

the text messages at trial under Evidence Rule 807, the residual exception

to the rule against hearsay. The court denied the notice of intent, finding

the text messages were supported by sufficient guarantees of

trustworthiness but characterizing their probative value as “quite low.”

¶12  Before trial, Horcasitas pled guilty to a count of

endangerment, Count 5 of the original indictment. A second jury then

found him guilty of manslaughter, a dangerous offense.

¶13  The superior court sentenced Horcasitas to a presumptive

term of 10.5 years’ imprisonment on the count of manslaughter and a

concurrent, presumptive term of 2.25 years’ imprisonment on the count of

endangerment. Horcasitas timely appealed. We have jurisdiction under

Article 6, Section 9, of the Arizona Constitution and A.R.S.

§§ 12-120.21(A)(1), 13-4031, and -4033(A)(1).

     DISCUSSION

    I. Preclusion of the Text Messages

     4
           STATE v. HORCASITAS
             Opinion of the Court

¶14        Horcasitas argues the superior court improperly precluded

certain text messages retrieved from the victim’s cell phone, and in doing

so, infringed on his constitutional right to present a complete defense.

¶15        We review a superior court’s evidentiary rulings for an abuse

of discretion. State v. Zaid, 249 Ariz. 154, 157, ¶ 5 (App. 2020). But we

interpret the rules of evidence de novo. Id.

¶16        We will affirm the superior court’s ruling if “legally correct

for any reason.” State v. Carlson, 237 Ariz. 381, 387, ¶ 7 (2015) (quoting State

v. Perez, 141 Ariz. 459, 464 (1984)). But if the court erred in excluding

evidence, we will uphold the verdict only if “we can say beyond a

reasonable doubt that the error did not contribute to or affect the verdict.”

State v. Fish, 222 Ariz. 109, 114, ¶ 8 (App. 2009).

¶17        First, Horcasitas argues the superior court’s evidentiary

ruling violated the “law of the case” doctrine. Despite conceding that the

first trial court, and this court on review, “considered the text messages”

only within “the context of discovery rather than admissibility,” Horcasitas

contends that the “logical underpinnings” of the discovery determination

are “binding on the issue of admissibility.”

¶18        “’Law of the case’ concerns the practice of refusing to reopen

questions previously decided in the same case by the same court or a higher

appellate court.” State v. Whelan, 208 Ariz. 168, 171, ¶ 8 (App. 2004) (quoting

Davis v. Davis, 195 Ariz. 158, 162, ¶ 13 (App. 1999)). As Horcasitas correctly

points out, on review, this court upheld the first trial court’s finding that

evidence of the text messages “was material to Horcasitas’ self-defense

claim” and therefore subject to mandatory disclosure. Horcasitas, 1 CA-CR

23-0215, at *5, ¶ 25. But neither the first trial court nor this court addressed

the admissibility of such evidence, a separate question. See Mittelstadt v.

Burgess, 259 Ariz. 192, 197, ¶ 12 (App. 2025) (explaining the scope of

discoverable evidence is greater than the scope of admissible evidence:

“[E]vidence need not be admissible to be discoverable.”). Because not all

material evidence is admissible, see Ariz. R. Evid. 402, and the admissibility

of the text messages remained an unresolved issue, the superior court’s

evidentiary ruling in the second trial did not implicate the law of the case

doctrine.

¶19        Next, Horcasitas argues that the text messages sent to the

victim by his brother-in-law were admissible to: (1) establish the victim’s

character trait for aggression, (2) prove who was the initial aggressor, and

(3) corroborate Horcasitas’s overall account of the shooting.

           5
     STATE v. HORCASITAS
       Opinion of the Court

¶20  To address this claim, we first review the relevant rules of

evidence. Evidence Rule 404 governs character evidence. Subsection (a)

generally precludes evidence of a person’s character or trait “for the

purpose of proving action in conformity therewith on a particular

occasion.” But as relevant here, subsection (a)(2) provides an exception,

permitting an accused to present evidence “of a pertinent trait of character

of the victim.” The victim exception is not unbounded, however. Subsection

(b) precludes evidence of “other crimes, wrongs, or acts” for propensity

purposes, permitting other-act evidence only to prove “motive,

opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, or absence of

mistake or accident.” Ariz. R. Evid. 404(b)(1), (2). Evidence Rule 405 further

delineates the permissible methods of presenting character evidence.

“When evidence of a person’s character or character trait is admissible”

under Evidence Rule 404, Evidence Rule 405(a) strictly limits the form of

such evidence to “testimony about the person’s reputation” or opinion

“testimony.” “On cross-examination of the character witness,” however,

“the court may allow an inquiry into relevant specific instances of the

person’s conduct.” Ariz. R. Evid. 405(a). Likewise, “[w]hen a person’s

character or character trait is an essential element of a charge, claim, or

defense, . . . the character or trait may also be proved by relevant specific

instances of the person’s conduct.” Ariz. R. Evid. 405(b).

¶21  Before trial, Horcasitas sought to admit the following text

messages sent from the victim’s brother-in-law to the victim:

     [Y]ou perceive everything [as] aggressive.

     Look at how many times you snap in your truck alone.

     Stop being so aggressive.

     Only every single argument you have is the other guy’s fault.

     Look at your steering wheel.

     That’s your brain assuming the world is attacking you.

¶22  Applying the governing evidentiary rules, these texts were

inadmissible. See State v. Connor, 215 Ariz. 553, 558–59, ¶ 13 (App. 2007)

(explaining that a defendant may offer “proof of the victim’s reputation for

violence,” but “only in limited ways” (quoting State v. Zamora, 140 Ariz.

338, 341 (App. 1984))). First, none of the texts recounts a specific, isolated

event. Instead, they are general, vague assessments of the victim’s character

and tendencies. Accordingly, they do not constitute “other acts” as

                                   6
                        STATE v. HORCASITAS
                          Opinion of the Court

contemplated under Evidence Rule 404(b), and Horcasitas’s reliance on Fish
for the proposition that the texts could have been used for a non-propensity
purpose is misplaced. See Fish, 222 Ariz. at 114, 126, ¶¶ 9, 54 (holding that
“evidence of specific acts” of a victim’s past violence were relevant to
corroborate the defendant’s description of the events at issue, subject to “an
appropriate” Evidence Rule 403 balancing test, even though the defendant
was not aware of those specific acts).

¶23  Second, while opinion evidence that a victim has a character

trait for aggression or a tendency to misperceive others’ actions as a

personal attack may be admissible, Evidence Rule 405(a) plainly restricts

the form of such evidence to “testimony.” Connor, 215 Ariz. at 560, ¶ 18

(explaining that a defendant may prove a victim’s character trait only “by

testimony as to reputation or by testimony in the form of an opinion”

(quoting Ariz. R. Evid. 405(a))). Had the victim’s brother-in-law testified at

trial, defense counsel could have asked his opinion of the victim’s character

for aggression or tendency to misperceive others’ conduct as attacks,

consistent with the text messages. But such opinion evidence may be

introduced only through a testifying witness, not extrinsic evidence. Id. at

559, ¶ 13 (noting that when “evidence of a character trait is admissible[,]

such evidence is limited on direct examination to reputation or opinion

evidence”). Because the text messages are inadmissible under the

applicable rules of evidence, the superior court did not abuse its discretion

by precluding them at trial.1

¶24  Lastly, Horcasitas argues the superior court improperly

excluded a text message sent by the victim. According to Horcasitas, the

text message provides vital evidence concerning the victim’s state of

mind—evidence that, inferentially, demonstrates the reasonableness of

Horcasitas’s belief that he needed to respond to the victim’s aggression with

deadly physical force.

¶25  At trial, defense counsel asked a police sergeant whether he

discovered anything on the victim’s cell phone suggesting that the victim

“was troubled in the days prior” to the shooting. The prosecutor objected

to the line of questioning, citing the superior court’s prior ruling denying

1    To the extent Horcasitas argues that the text messages sent to the

victim by his brother-in-law were admissible, alternatively, under Evidence

Rule 807, such a contention is unfounded. Evidence Rule 807 provides a

residual exception to the general rule against hearsay, Ariz. R. Evid. 802,

not an exception to the rules strictly limiting character evidence, Ariz. R.

Evid. 404, 405.

                               7
     STATE v. HORCASITAS
       Opinion of the Court

defense counsel’s motion to compel disclosure of the victim’s mental health
records. The court agreed with the prosecutor, stating that defense counsel
was precluded from “going into [the victim’s] mental health.” As relevant
here, defense counsel then made the following offer of proof concerning a
text message sent by the victim three days before the shooting:

     [I]f you leave me be, my broke [expletive] who sleeps in his
     truck while painfully looking for and trying . . . to fight for my
     child, I’m trying like hell to fix me instead of blowing my
     brains out.

Defense counsel argued that evidence of the victim “expressing suicidal
ideation and desperation . . . [was] absolutely relevant . . . [to] the
reasonableness of [Horcasitas’s] fear.” While agreeing with defense counsel
that the evidence was relevant, the court sustained the State’s objection to
the text message, concluding that “under [Evidence Rule] 403, it’s—it’s
[probative value is] vastly outweighed by the danger of confusing the . . .
jurors.” Horcasitas challenges the superior court’s admissibility
determination on several fronts.

¶26  First, he implicitly argues that the proffered text did not run

afoul of the court order denying his motion to compel disclosure of the

victim’s mental health records. We agree. Although defense counsel

referenced other text messages in his offer of proof that arguably fell within

the ambit of the court’s order—such as a text from the victim stating he was

not taking his prescribed medications—the text message at issue does not

refer to the victim’s mental health treatment.

¶27  Second, Horcasitas contends that the proffered text was

admissible as a statement of the victim’s then-existing state of mind. Again,

we agree. In general, an out-of-court statement offered “to prove the truth

of the matter asserted” is inadmissible under the rule against hearsay. Ariz.

R. Evid. 801(c), 802. “To be admissible, a court must find that the out-of-

court statement fits within one of the many exceptions to the rule against

hearsay.” State v. Tucker, 205 Ariz. 157, 165, ¶ 41 (2003). Under Evidence

Rule 803(3), a declarant’s statement of his then-existing state of mind or

emotional condition is excepted from the general rule against hearsay. “The

rationale for [Evidence] Rule 803(3) rests on two assumptions: (1) [a]

declarant’s statements have special reliability due to spontaneity and

probable sincerity; and (2) because [a] declarant’s knowledge of his or her

state of mind is inherently superior to any external, circumstantial account,

there is a ‘fair necessity’ to use the declarant’s statements.” State v.

Fulminante, 193 Ariz. 485, 495, ¶ 31 (1999) (citation modified).

     8
                           STATE v. HORCASITAS
                             Opinion of the Court

¶28     Within the proffered text, the victim expressed a sense of

despair and disclosed a contemplation of self-harm. This declaration of the

victim’s then-existing mental and emotional state falls squarely within the

Evidence Rule 803(3) exception to the rule against hearsay.

¶29     While the State correctly notes that defense counsel did not

cite Evidence Rule 803 as a basis for admitting the victim’s text, the

prosecutor did not challenge the text’s admission on hearsay grounds.

¶30     Having found that the proffered text message was admissible

under Evidence Rule 803(3), we consider whether the superior court

nonetheless properly excluded the text under Evidence Rule 403. Under

that rule, relevant evidence may be excluded if its probative value “is

substantially outweighed” by, among other things, a danger of unfair

prejudice, confusion of the issues, or the needless presentation of

cumulative evidence. Ariz. R. Evid. 403. We defer to the court’s “balancing

determination under [Evidence] Rule 403 . . . [and] review such decisions

for an abuse of discretion.” State v. Parkinson, 258 Ariz. 601, 609, ¶ 28 (App.

2024).

¶31     Horcasitas contends that evidence of the victim’s mental

instability and emotional turmoil substantiates his defense that the victim

confronted him in an aggressive and threatening manner. In other words,

Horcasitas argues that insight into the victim’s state of mind—as revealed

in the text—supports an inference that he reasonably feared for his physical

safety and justifiably used deadly physical force to stave off the victim’s

imminent attack. See id. at ¶ 25 (concluding the superior court erroneously

precluded the defendant from offering evidence that tended to support his

“version” of the events).

¶32     The victim’s state of mind three days before the shooting was

arguably (at least marginally) relevant to Horcasitas’s defense and the sole

issue before the jury—whether Horcasitas reasonably believed (under an

objective standard), at the time he discharged his firearm, that he

immediately needed to use deadly physical force to protect himself against

the victim’s use or attempted use of unlawful physical force against him.

A.R.S. §§ 13-404 (self-defense), -405 (justification). But ample, more

pertinent evidence was presented at trial concerning the victim’s mental,

emotional, and physical state immediately before the shooting and the

threat he posed. See Fulminante, 193 Ariz. at 496, ¶ 34 (“[Evidence] Rule

803(3) can only be used if the declarant’s state of mind is probative of an

ultimate issue in the case.”). Numerous eyewitnesses described the victim

as “angry,” “upset,” “mad,” and “visibly agitated” when he got out of his

                           9
           STATE v. HORCASITAS
             Opinion of the Court

truck. The eyewitnesses also uniformly recounted that the victim
aggressively gestured and shouted as he advanced toward Horcasitas’s car.
In fact, multiple eyewitnesses testified that the victim’s disturbing
demeanor and behavior prompted them to lock their car doors. Given these
consistent and uncontroverted accounts, no question remained concerning
the victim’s role as the initial aggressor in the confrontation. Therefore, on
this record, the superior court acted within its discretion by precluding the
victim’s text message as more prejudicial than probative under Evidence
Rule 403.

II. Presentation of Video Generated by Artificial Intelligence
         During Sentencing

¶33        Horcasitas challenges the presentation of certain victim

impact evidence at the sentencing hearing. Specifically, he contends that he

was denied due process when the sentencing judge heard and expressly

relied on an AI-generated video that recreated the victim’s appearance and

voice.

¶34        Because Horcasitas did not object to the AI video at

sentencing, we review only for fundamental error. State v. Rose, 231 Ariz.

500, 510, ¶ 43 (2013). Victim impact evidence is permitted at sentencing

“unless it is so unduly prejudicial that it renders” the sentencing procedure

“fundamentally unfair.” Id. at ¶ 45 (citation modified); see also State v.

Flowers, 159 Ariz. 469, 472 (App. 1989) (“Where a defendant has been denied

an essential component of due process, such denial constitutes fundamental

error.”).

¶35        At the sentencing hearing, numerous friends and family

members of the victim spoke. They described the victim as compassionate,

loving, kind, selfless, peaceful, brave, and heroic. They recounted fond

memories from his life and detailed the “immense and unrelenting” pain

caused by his death. Several speakers asked the sentencing judge to impose

the maximum sentence allowed by law, which, because the State alleged no

aggravating factors, was the presumptive term of 10.5 years in prison. See

A.R.S. § 13-704(A). As part of his prepared remarks, the victim’s brother

read a lengthy statement the victim had “penned,” which conveyed, in the

victim’s actual words, his spiritual beliefs, values, goals, and hopes for the

future. Lastly, the victim’s sister spoke. She stated, in relevant part:

        We’ve heard [the victim] write what he wanted his future to
        look like, but what would he have said if he could have taken
        my place today? I’m in his spot. He deserved this. What

           10
                   STATE v. HORCASITAS
                     Opinion of the Court

        would [the victim] have thought about all of this? That’s the
        one intrusive thought that I can’t stop from hearing.

        This whole thing is about him, and he’s not even here to tell
        us what he would think about it, but I imagine it constantly
        because I know he would say everything I would absolutely
        never be able to say myself.

(Emphasis added).

¶36     At that point, an AI video, which depicted the “victim”

speaking to the camera, was played. The video began with the AI victim

explaining that the video was a “version” of himself “recreated through AI

that use[d] [his] picture and [his] voice profile.” Then, a “real” video of the

victim, embedded within the AI video, played, in which the victim

conveyed his faith and spiritual beliefs to an unidentified individual. When

the video of the victim ended, the AI victim reappeared and stated that the

AI video “is a true representation of who [he] was . . . not how the courtroom

portrayed [him].” (Emphasis added). After the AI victim thanked the court

and his friends and family in attendance, he addressed Horcasitas—stating

in part, “I believe in forgiveness and in God who forgives.” The AI victim

then ended his remarks by conveying his love for his friends and family

and assuring them he would see them “on the other side,” while what

appears to be another embedded “real” video showed him fishing.

¶37     After a short recess, the attorney representing the victim’s

family spoke. She asked the sentencing judge to “weigh the victim impact

as rebuttal to any mitigation” presented by Horcasitas and impose “the

maximum sentence authorized by the jury verdict.”

¶38     The prosecutor then addressed the sentencing judge.

Acknowledging the mitigating circumstances Horcasitas offered up,

including the absence of any criminal history, she asked the sentencing

judge to impose a slightly mitigated sentence of 9 years’ imprisonment.

¶39     Three people spoke on Horcasitas’s behalf, requesting

leniency and the minimum sentence. Horcasitas then spoke. He apologized

to the victim’s family and stated that the “events that transpired that day

are undoubtedly the most frightening and regrettable five seconds of my

life.”

¶40     Finally, defense counsel spoke and stressed the mitigating

circumstances outlined in his sentencing memorandum, particularly noting

the absence of any criminal history, and asked the sentencing judge to find

                   11
              STATE v. HORCASITAS
                Opinion of the Court

that the mitigating circumstances substantially outweighed “all other
evidence” and impose a mitigated term of 7 years’ imprisonment.

¶41           Following those remarks, the sentencing judge addressed the

courtroom. The judge noted that the victim’s family and Horcasitas’s family

had suffered and would continue to suffer a great loss. The judge then

spoke to the victim’s family directly, in relevant part:

     Does that mean I think that Mr. Horcasitas, because of the loss
     to the family should get the maximum sentence or I think that
     he should get the minimum sentence? It doesn’t matter what
     I think.

     Whether I think he should get 40 years or 1 year. I have to
     follow the law.

     . . . .

     Under the legal standards we will never compensate the
     [victim’s] family for their loss, never.

     . . . .

     I loved that AI. Thank you for that, and as angry as you are
     and justifiably angry as the family is, I heard the forgiveness
     and I know Mr. Horcasitas appreciated it, but so did I.

     As I said, I’d like to think I would do that. I don’t know that I
     would, but I love the beauty in what [victim’s first name]—
     and I call him [victim’s first name]. I always call people by
     their last names. It’s a formality of the Court, but I feel like
     calling him [victim’s first name] as we’ve gotten to know him
     today.

     I feel that that was genuine; that his obvious forgiveness of
     Mr. Horcasitas reflects the character I heard about today, but
     it also says something about the family because you told me
     how angry you were and you demanded the maximum
     sentence, and even though that’s what you wanted you
     allowed [victim’s first name] to speak from his heart as you
     saw it. I didn’t hear him asking for the maximum sentence.

     So, that brings us to sentencing. I do find the following
     mitigating circumstances: Mr. Horcasitas has spent his entire

              12
                      STATE v. HORCASITAS
                        Opinion of the Court

     life as a law-abiding citizen. He made a dreadful error of
     judgment, but that is mitigating. I did hear remorse.

     However, the loss I’ve heard from the [victim’s] family, as I
     said could not be more profound. It’s not an aggravator but it
     reduces the effectiveness or power of the mitigating fact that
     Mr. Horcasitas has led a lawful life.

     For that reason I find the presumptive term [of 10.5 years in
     prison] is appropriate. That’s more than the State asked for.

(Emphasis added). Horcasitas argues he was deprived of due process
because the sentencing court heard and relied on the AI video.

¶42  The Arizona Victims’ Bill of Rights affords victims the right

to “be heard at any proceeding involving . . . sentencing.” Ariz. Const. art.

2, § 2.1(A)(4); see also A.R.S. § 13-4426(A), (B) (affording victims the right to

“address the court” regarding “opinions that concern . . . the sentence . . . at

any . . . sentencing proceeding”). Because victims do not appear as

witnesses in those circumstances, they are not required to disclose their

statements to the State, the defendant, or the court. A.R.S. § 13-4426.01. They

do not take an oath before making statements to the court, nor are their

statements subject to cross-examination. See id.

¶43  Victims’ rights “are to ‘be liberally construed,’” Lynn v.

Reinstein, 205 Ariz. 186, 188, ¶ 7 (2003) (quoting A.R.S. § 13-4418), but their

“right to speak is not unlimited,” id. at 191, ¶ 17. Victims have a

constitutional right to speak concerning “the harm caused by the

defendant’s criminal acts,” but their statements cannot infringe on the

defendant’s constitutional rights, including the right to due process. See id.

¶44  In general, a “sentencing judge can exercise wide discretion

in the sources and types of evidence used to assist . . . in determining the

kind and extent of punishment to be imposed within the limits fixed by

law.” State v. Ross, 144 Ariz. 154, 156–57 (App. 1984); State v. Conn, 137 Ariz.

148, 149 (1983) (“[A] sentencing judge has wide discretion to consider

information in imposing sentence.”). But “[t]here is no simple, mechanical

test to determine when [victim impact evidence] crosses the line between

permissible and unduly prejudicial.” Rose, 231 Ariz. at 510, ¶ 46.

Accordingly, our supreme court has “caution[ed] prosecutors and victims

not to venture too close to the line,” and “encourage[ed] judges . . . to screen

and, if necessary, limit” a victim impact presentation “that is so unduly

prejudicial that it renders the trial fundamentally unfair.” Id. at 511, ¶ 47

(citation modified).

                      13
                   STATE v. HORCASITAS
                     Opinion of the Court

¶45            Because the “rules governing the admissibility of evidence at

trial do not apply” at a sentencing hearing, “[a]ny reliable, relevant

evidence” generally “may be introduced at the sentencing hearing to show

aggravating or mitigating circumstances.” Conn, 137 Ariz. at 149–50; see also

Ariz. R. Crim. P. 26.7(b) (stating that any party at a presentencing hearing

“may introduce any reliable, relevant evidence, including hearsay, to show

aggravating or mitigating circumstances”). To be clear, however, “the

relaxation in the traditional evidentiary rules and procedures . . . is not

unlimited.” Conn, 137 Ariz. at 150. “To give substance to the protection

afforded by the Due Process Clause,” only evidence bearing a “minimal

indicia of reliability” may be considered at sentencing. State v. McGill, 213

Ariz. 147, 160, ¶ 56 (2006) (citation modified). In other words, “defendants

have a due process right to a fair sentencing procedure which includes the

right to be sentenced on the basis of accurate information.” State v. Grier,

146 Ariz. 511, 515 (1985); see also Conn, 137 Ariz. at 150 (“[A] defendant has

a legitimate interest in the character of the procedure which leads to the

imposition of [a] sentence even if he may have no right to object to a

particular result.”). When a “defendant can demonstrate that false

information formed part of the basis for the sentence,” the “sentence must

be set aside.” Grier, 146 Ariz. at 515.

¶46            Horcasitas argues the AI video was inadmissible and carried

“undue emotional weight.” Specifically, he contends the “lifelike AI

recreation of the victim conveyed an authority and authenticity” that had a

“psychological impact” on the sentencing judge. More broadly, he argues

that “[a]llowing AI-generated statements . . . dilutes the constitutional

requirement that sentencing evidence possess minimal indicia of

reliability.”

¶47            The State disagrees. It argues the AI video was reliable

because: (1) it reflects what the victim’s sister “believed” the victim “would

have said,” had he spoken at the sentencing hearing; (2) the victim and his

sister shared a “close familial relationship,” allowing for the reasonable

inference that “the sentiments conveyed by [the] AI [victim] were probably

accurate”; and (3) the AI video is “consistent” with the victim’s written

account of his beliefs and values, as read at the sentencing hearing by the

victim’s brother.

¶48            No Arizona case has addressed the admissibility of an AI-

generated depiction of a victim offered as victim impact evidence. In

analyzing this novel issue, we are guided by our supreme court’s analysis

in Rose, which addressed victim impact information provided to a jury in

                                         14
     STATE v. HORCASITAS
       Opinion of the Court

the penalty phase of a case in which the State sought the death penalty. Rose,
231 Ariz. at 509–13, ¶¶ 40–62.

¶49  In Rose, the supreme court considered, among other things,

whether two photographs taken of a homicide victim’s young sons at his

gravesite were improperly admitted as victim impact evidence. Id. at

511–12, ¶¶ 48, 50–52. At the outset of its analysis, the supreme court pointed

to “Arizona’s constitution, statutes, and court rules,” which guarantee

victims the right to speak at sentencing. Id. at 511, ¶ 51. While the right of

victims to speak “about the effect” criminal conduct “has had on them” is

largely unfettered, the supreme court noted that the presentation of

photographs as victim impact evidence is reviewed on an ad hoc basis. Id.

at 511–12, ¶¶ 50–52. “Given their marginal relevance, the danger of unfair

prejudice their admission posed, and the extensive, clearly permissible”

victim impact evidence that already had been presented, the supreme court

determined that had the superior court excluded “the two photographs in

question,” it “would have acted well within its discretion.” Id. at 512, ¶ 52

(citation modified). But despite describing the victim impact evidence,

including the photographs, as “troubling,” and characterizing their

presentation as “uncomfortably close” to “cross[ing] the line between

permissible and unduly prejudicial,” the supreme court concluded that the

trial court did not err by considering them, reasoning that even “without

the photographs,” it was evident “that the murder caused the two boys to

suffer a devastating loss.” Id. at 510, 512, ¶¶ 46, 52.

¶50  By contrast, the AI video crossed that line. Unlike the

photographs in Rose, which captured a particularly poignant moment for

the young surviving victims, the AI video here (excluding the embedded

“real” videos of the victim) does not reflect actual events. Indeed, rather

than documenting an event or recording a particular moment, the AI video

presents a depiction of the victim and his thoughts created from the

imaginings of the victim’s sister.

¶51  Moreover, despite the explanations concerning the genesis of

the AI video, it presents the statement (including non-verbal

communications made through facial expressions and the like) as coming

directly from the victim. It erases the interpretive distance between the

family’s belief about what the victim would have said and the victim’s own

voice and opinions. Indeed, the AI victim stated, “this here is a true

representation of who I was, you know, not how the courtroom portrayed

me.” No disclaimer could cure that error.

                                    15
                   STATE v. HORCASITAS
                     Opinion of the Court

¶52            And it clearly impacted the sentencing judge, who said he

“loved” the video and felt it “was genuine,” pointing to the AI victim’s

“obvious forgiveness” of Horcasitas, which he characterized as coming

from the AI victim’s “heart.” While the record does not reflect precisely

how the AI video factored into the sentencing calculus, there is no question

it played a role.

¶53            In sum, while the embedded “real” video footage of the

victim was permissible, allowing the presentation of the AI video

constituted fundamental error. And on this record, the judge’s

consideration of the AI video so prejudiced Horcasitas as to render the

sentencing procedure fundamentally unfair. Accordingly, we vacate the

sentence for manslaughter and remand for resentencing.

                   CONCLUSION

¶54            For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the manslaughter

conviction but vacate the sentence for manslaughter, and remand for

resentencing.

                   MATTHEW J. MARTIN • Clerk of the Court

                   FILED:  JR

                           16
