<title>Arizona Court Tosses 10.5-Year Sentence Over AI-Generated Victim Impact Video | Law Commentary</title>
<title>Reddit</title>
<meta property="og:title" content="Arizona Court Tosses 10.5-Year Sentence Over AI-Generated Victim Impact Video | Law Commentary"/>
<meta name="description" content="An Arizona appeals court has thrown out a 10.5-year manslaughter sentence after finding that a judge improperly relied on an AI-generated victim impact video that recreated shooting victim Christopher Pelkey speaking at the defendant’s sentencing.In a unanimous published opinion issued September 30 in State v. Horcasitas, the Arizona Court of..."/>
<meta property="og:description" content="An Arizona appeals court has thrown out a 10.5-year manslaughter sentence after finding that a judge improperly relied on an AI-generated victim impact video that recreated shooting victim Christopher Pelkey speaking at the defendant’s sentencing.In a unanimous published opinion issued September 30 in State v. Horcasitas, the Arizona Court of..."/>
<meta property="article:published_time" content="2026-10-02 04:01:00"/>
<meta property="article:modified_time" content="2026-10-01 22:11:13"/>

====

Arizona Court Tosses 10.5-Year Sentence Over AI-Generated Victim Impact Video | Law Commentary

 Skip to main content

 Newsletter
 Subscribe to Newsletter

 Search

 Editions

 Durham, NC Legal News, Information & Blogs

 Search

 Editions

 Arizona Court Tosses 10.5-Year Sentence Over AI-Generated Victim Impact Video

 by Alexandra Agraz | Oct 02, 2026

 Photo Source: Adobe Stock Image

 An Arizona appeals court has thrown out a 10.5-year manslaughter sentence after finding that a judge improperly relied on an AI-generated victim impact video that recreated shooting victim Christopher Pelkey speaking at the defendant’s sentencing.

In a unanimous published opinion issued September 30 in State v. Horcasitas, the Arizona Court of Appeals, Division One, vacated Gabriel Paul Horcasitas’ sentence and ordered a new sentencing hearing while leaving his manslaughter conviction intact. The panel found that the artificial intelligence recreation of Pelkey lacked the reliability required for information used to determine a criminal sentence.

The appeal followed Horcasitas’ second trial in Pelkey’s fatal 2021 road-rage shooting. A jury rejected his claim that he acted in self-defense and convicted him of manslaughter. Horcasitas challenged both the exclusion of text messages recovered from Pelkey’s phone and the use of the AI-generated victim presentation at sentencing. The appeals court rejected the evidentiary challenge but agreed that consideration of the synthetic video violated his right to a fair sentencing proceeding.

At sentencing, Pelkey’s family presented a video that used AI to recreate his appearance and voice. The synthetic version addressed his family, the court, and Horcasitas while also incorporating authentic video footage of Pelkey.

The recreation identified itself as a version of Pelkey created using his photograph and voice profile. It later addressed Horcasitas and expressed forgiveness, reflecting beliefs that Pelkey’s sister said she thought her brother would have expressed if he had been able to speak at the hearing.

Maricopa County Superior Court Judge Todd Lang reacted favorably to the presentation. According to the appellate opinion, Lang said he “loved that AI,” described the recreation as “genuine” and referred to Pelkey’s apparent forgiveness of Horcasitas as coming from his “heart.”

Pelkey’s family asked for the maximum sentence available, while prosecutors sought a slightly mitigated nine-year term and the defense requested seven years. Because prosecutors had not alleged aggravating factors, the presumptive 10.5-year sentence was also the maximum available for the manslaughter conviction.

Lang imposed the 10.5-year term and acknowledged that it was more than prosecutors had requested.

Arizona’s Victims’ Bill of Rights gives crime victims broad protections in the criminal justice system, including the right to be heard before sentencing. Victim impact statements are also treated differently from ordinary trial testimony. Victims do not testify under oath or face cross-examination, and sentencing judges have wide discretion to consider information that would not necessarily be admissible before a jury.

But sentencing information still must have at least a minimal level of reliability because defendants have a due process right to be sentenced using accurate information. The appeals court found that the synthetic portions of the video failed that standard.

The panel emphasized that those portions did not document anything Pelkey actually said or did. Instead, they presented his sister’s conception of what he would have thought and said through Pelkey’s recreated face and voice, eliminating the distance between the family’s understanding of his views and Pelkey’s actual views.

The State argued that the recreation was sufficiently reliable because Pelkey’s sister knew him closely and the sentiments attributed to him were consistent with his writings, beliefs and values. The appellate panel was not persuaded.

Although the video disclosed that artificial intelligence had been used, the court found that disclosure did not make the synthetic statements reliable. The recreated Pelkey subsequently described himself as a true representation of who Pelkey was, while the video supplied facial expressions, a voice, and statements that Pelkey had never recorded. The panel concluded that the disclaimer did not cure the resulting reliability problem.

For guidance, the judges looked to State v. Rose, an Arizona Supreme Court decision involving emotionally powerful victim impact evidence. The court in Rose allowed photographs depicting the grief of surviving family members despite finding that the presentation came close to the boundary between permissible victim impact evidence and material that could make sentencing fundamentally unfair.

Unlike the photographs in Rose, which documented events that actually occurred, the synthetic portions of Pelkey’s video created speech and conduct that never occurred. The AI presentation attributed those words and expressions to a person who could no longer confirm what he believed or would have said.

The appellate court also found that the video played a role in Lang’s sentencing decision, pointing to his comments immediately after the presentation. Although the record did not show how much weight he ultimately gave the AI recreation, the panel found that he relied on it in imposing the sentence.

Because Horcasitas had not objected to the AI video at sentencing, the appeals court reviewed the issue for fundamental error rather than under the standard applied to a preserved objection. The panel still found the error serious enough to render the sentencing proceeding fundamentally unfair.

The ruling applies specifically to the synthetic portions of the victim impact presentation. The panel distinguished those sections from genuine footage of Pelkey included in the same video and focused on new statements, facial expressions and conduct created by AI and attributed directly to a victim who could no longer confirm them.

Other courtroom uses of artificial intelligence remain unresolved in Arizona, including technology used to restore authentic recordings, present a person’s actual words or create demonstrative evidence. The court described State v. Horcasitas as the first Arizona case to address an AI-generated depiction of a victim offered as victim impact evidence.

The case had already returned to trial once before the latest appeal. Horcasitas’ first manslaughter conviction was set aside after the trial court found that prosecutors failed to timely disclose evidence recovered from Pelkey’s phone that included material supporting his self-defense arguments. The Court of Appeals upheld the new-trial order before a second jury again convicted him.

On the separate text-message challenge in the latest appeal, the panel upheld the trial court’s evidentiary rulings, including the exclusion of a message concerning Pelkey’s mental state. That ruling left Horcasitas’ second manslaughter conviction intact.

With the conviction affirmed and the sentence vacated, Horcasitas will return to Maricopa County Superior Court for resentencing.

 Share This Article

 If you found this article insightful, consider sharing it with your network.

 Alexandra Agraz

 Alexandra Agraz is a former Diplomatic Aide with firsthand experience in facilitating high-level international events, including the signing of critical economic and political agreements between the United States and Mexico. She holds dual associate degrees in Humanities, Social and Political Sciences, and Film, blending a diverse academic background in diplomacy, culture, and storytelling. This unique combination enables her to provide nuanced perspectives on global relations and cultural narratives.

 Related Articles

 Federal Appeals Court Moves to Crack Down on AI Filings After Lawyers Cite Fake Cases

 A federal appeals court is moving to tighten its rules on artificial intelligence after judges encountered court filings containing fabricated cases, false quotations and other AI-generated legal errors.The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit proposed a new rule September 18 that would require lawyers and self-represented litigants to...
 Read
 More »

 AI Music Fraudster Wants Probation After $8M Scheme, Says No Artist Suffered Meaningful Harm

 The man who admitted using AI-generated music and billions of fake streams to collect more than $8 million in royalties is asking a federal judge for probation, arguing that the losses were spread so widely that no individual artist or songwriter suffered meaningful financial harm.Michael Smith pleaded guilty in March...
 Read
 More »

 New Mexico Lawyer Fined $5,000 After Using ChatGPT to Draft Murder Appeal With Fake Witnesses

 A New Mexico defense lawyer has been fined $5,000 after using ChatGPT to help draft a murder appeal, failing to check what it produced and filing a brief that included four witnesses who never existed, false testimony, and misrepresented legal authority.The New Mexico Supreme Court held Santa Fe attorney Stephen...
 Read
 More »

 Lawyer for State Farm Fined $999.99 Over 7 Fake AI Case Citations

 A California judge has ordered a lawyer for State Farm to pay $999.99 after finding seven nonexistent case citations in pretrial filings, errors the attorney said stemmed from her use of an artificial intelligence legal research tool.Los Angeles Superior Court Judge Elizabeth L. Bradley imposed the sanction on Jacquelene Robinson,...
 Read
 More »

 Federal Appeals Court Blocks Charge Over Private Possession of AI-Generated Child Sexual Abuse Images

 A federal appeals court has upheld the dismissal of a charge against Wisconsin resident Steven Anderegg for privately possessing obscene AI-generated sexual images depicting fictional children in his home, finding that existing Supreme Court precedent protects that narrow form of possession under the First Amendment. Separate federal charges accusing him...
 Read
 More »

 Legal Blogs

 The Role of Private Investigators in Asset Searches for Litigation

 by Millennium Intelligence Agency
 | Investigative Services

 Attorney Advertising

 Law Commentary

 About Us

 Privacy Policy

 Copyright Policy

 Contact Us

 For Lawyers

 Showcase Your Law Firm
 Blog

 Be a Legal Commentator

 Advertise Your Law
 Firm

 Publishers and News Agencies

 Our Legal News Content

 Licensing Agreement

 Syndication Feeds

 Follow Law Commentary

 © 2020 - 2026 Law
 Commentary, LLC.
 All
 rights
 reserved.

 Durham, NC

 Search

 Editions

 October 07, 2026

 Newsletter
 Subscribe to Newsletter

 Search articles and Legalpedia

 Search articles and Legalpedia

 Search

 Subscribe to Newsletter
