<title>Grok Bot | SpaceXAI Docs</title>
<meta name="description" content="Grok Bot gives you Bots you can keep around: AI teammates with names, jobs, and context that compounds over time, working on a persistent cloud computer."/>
<meta property="og:title" content="Grok Bot | SpaceXAI Docs"/>
<meta property="og:description" content="Grok Bot gives you Bots you can keep around: AI teammates with names, jobs, and context that compounds over time, working on a persistent cloud computer."/>

====

Grok Bot | SpaceXAI Docs

API
Grok BuildGrok BotGrok
Search

⌘K

API Console

Products
Grok
Status
Loading...
Resources
llms.txtDiscordEmail supportTerms and Policies

Get Started
Overview
Get started
Use cases
Grok Bot for Mobile

Work with Grok Bot
Create and manage Bots
Team Bots
Message and collaborate
Files and results
Use the computer and apps
Skills and routines

Manage and protect
Settings and notifications
Approvals, security, and privacy
Teams and enterprises

Help
Troubleshooting
FAQ

APIDocs
REST Reference

Grok Build
Grok Bot
Grok

Get Started
Overview
Get started
Use cases
Grok Bot for Mobile

Work with Grok Bot
Create and manage Bots
Team Bots
Message and collaborate
Files and results
Use the computer and apps
Skills and routines

Manage and protect
Settings and notifications
Approvals, security, and privacy
Teams and enterprises

Help
Troubleshooting
FAQ

Grok Bot
Grok Bot
Copy for LLMView as Markdown
Create API keyMeet grok-4.7

Grok Bot gives you Bots you can keep around: AI teammates with names, jobs, and
context that compounds over time. Each Bot works on a persistent cloud computer
with a browser, filesystem, and terminal, so tasks finish in your real tools
instead of as chat drafts. Get started with your first
Bot, or read how teams roll it out.
You work with a Bot by messaging it. Type, dictate, or start a voice chat.
Give it a task, the relevant context, and access to the tools it needs. It takes on multi-step work across apps and websites, keeps you
updated in the conversation (including voice memos and drafts you approve
before they are sent), and comes back when something needs your approval.
Grok Bot runs on macOS, Windows, Linux, iOS, and Android, and is included with
every paid individual Cursor plan and with the Cursor Teams plan. You can also
link an individual SuperGrok, SuperGrok Plus, or SuperGrok Heavy subscription.
See Plans and billing for the full
matrix.
What makes Grok Bot different

Each Bot has a computer. Your Bots run on a persistent cloud computer with
a browser, filesystem, and terminal. They use
connectors where available and
computer use for everything else, and work continues while your laptop is
closed.

Setup is a message, not a workflow builder. Create a Bot, describe the
job, and grant access as it asks. The same Bot is reachable from the desktop
app and the mobile app.

Bots coordinate with each other. Your Bots can run in parallel, message
each other, share context in
group chats, and pass
ownership of a task, so you aren't the router between tools.

Bots learn workflows from demonstration. Walk a Bot through a multi-step
path once, and it can save the path as a
skill and rerun it on a schedule.

Context compounds. A named Bot keeps its memory, files, browser sessions,
and preferences across sessions instead of resetting on every task.

Your Bots share one computer
All of your Bots use the same cloud computer, sharing its files, browser
sessions, and app logins, which makes handoffs work without repeating setup. The
computer belongs to your account, not to an individual Bot, so treat anything
placed on it as available to every Bot you run; between users, isolation is
strict. The computer and apps covers the full
model.
A good first handoff
Start with a real task that spans a few tools and has a clear finish line:

Pull this week's pipeline review list from our CRM. Skip anyone already in an
active sequence. Research the top five accounts across the web and Slack,
pull the right contacts, draft outreach in my voice, and leave me drafts to
approve by tomorrow morning.

This tells the Bot what to do, where to work, what context to pull in, and what
finished work looks like. Review the result, correct it, and turn the stable
process into a skill or routine.
FAQ
Does Grok Bot keep working when my laptop is closed?
Yes. Work runs on the cloud computer. Closing the app, your laptop, or your
phone doesn't stop a background turn or a routine.
Can several Bots work at the same time?
Yes. Bots can reason, use connectors, work with files, and coordinate in
parallel. Each Bot gets its own screen on the shared computer, and one Bot runs
one computer-use task on its screen at a time.
What does a Bot remember?
Stable preferences, role context, and summaries of prior work. Conversations
and learned context stay separate per Bot, while shared files, browser
sessions, and direct handoffs move context between them. For consequential
decisions, ask the Bot to check the current source instead of relying on
memory.
Can a Bot use any website?
Bots can use many browser-based tools, including services without a connector.
A site can still block automation, expire a session, or require a human step.
The Bot hands those steps to you rather than working around them.
Which platforms are supported?
The desktop app runs on macOS (Apple silicon and Intel), Windows (x64 and
Arm64), and Linux (x64 and Arm64), and the mobile app runs on iPhone, iPad,
and Android. The computers Bots work on run in Cursor's cloud.
How much does Grok Bot cost?
Access is included with every paid individual Cursor plan and with the Cursor
Teams plan, or through an individual SuperGrok account link. Usage resets
weekly. See Plans and billing.
Next steps
Get started
Install the app, create your first Bot, and hand it a useful task.

Explore
Use cases
Roles that work well, with starter prompts you can adapt.

Explore
Work with Grok Bot
Bots, messaging, the shared computer, and skills and routines, one page each.

Explore
Teams and Enterprise
Admin controls, identity, private networks, and the recommended rollout baseline.

Explore
Security
Network policy, approvals and Auto Review, logging, and data handling.

Explore

Last updated: September 21, 2026
