<title>Google Signs Nuclear Deal With Constellation Energy</title>
<meta name="description" content="The utility company will supply 3.59 gigawatts of power to the tech giant under long-term agreements.">
<meta property="og:description" content="The utility company will supply 3.59 gigawatts of power to the tech giant under long-term agreements.">
<meta property="og:title" content="Google Signs Nuclear Deal With Constellation Energy">

====

Google Signs Nuclear Deal With Constellation Energy 

 Oops, something went wrong

 Skip to navigation Skip to main content Skip to right column 
 Yahoo Finance

 Home 
 News 
 Finance 
 Sports 
 More 

 News US 
 Politics 
 World 
 Tech 
 Science 
 Originals 
 Weather 
 Newsletters 

 Finance My portfolio 
 News 
 Markets 
 Research 
 Community 
 Personal finance 
 Videos 

 Sports Fantasy Football 2026 
 College football 
 NFL 
 NBA 
 MLB 
 NHL 
 College basketball 
 Soccer 
 Fantasy 
 Sports Betting 
 NFL Odds 
 Yahoo Sports AM 
 World Cup 

 Shopping October Prime Day deals 
 Style 
 Beauty 
 Health 
 Home and garden 
 Tech 
 Gift ideas 
 Stores 
 Shopping Guides 
 Deals 
 Toys and games 
 Shopping lists 
 General 

 Entertainment Celebrity 
 TV 
 Movies 
 Music 
 How to Watch 
 Videos 
 Nonfiction Hotlist 
 Games 

 Life Health 
 Parenting 
 Pets 
 Horoscopes 
 Food 
 Travel 
 Autos 
 Local 
 October Prime Day tech deals 
 Best October Prime Day tech deals 
 Selected edition US English 

 Sign in 

 My Portfolio 

 News 
 Markets 
 Stock market 
 Crypto 
 Real estate 
 Magnificent 7 
 Private markets 
 Futures & Derivatives 

 Originals 
 Premium news 

 Newsletters 
 Economy & Policy 
 Earnings 
 Oil & gas 
 Strait of Hormuz 
 Tariffs 
 Clean Energy 

 Tech 
 Aerospace & Defense 
 Enterprise Cloud 
 Pharma & Biotech 
 Cybersecurity 

 Exchange-Traded Funds 

 Markets 
 Stocks 
 Most active 
 Day gainers 
 Day losers 
 Trending 
 Highest dividend 
 Small cap 
 Large cap 
 Most expensive 
 Highest beta 
 Pink sheet 
 Unusual volume 

 Crypto 
 Most active 
 Day gainers 
 Day losers 

 Private companies 
 52 week gainers 
 Recently funded 
 Most funded 

 Options 
 Day gainers 
 Day losers 
 Highest open interest 
 Highest implied volatility 

 Sectors 
 Technology 
 Financial services 
 Consumer cyclical 
 Communication services 
 Healthcare 
 Industrials 
 Consumer defensive 
 Energy 
 Basic materials 
 Real estate 
 Utilities 

 Treasury bonds 
 Futures 
 Currencies 
 World indices 
 ETFs 
 Mutual funds 

 Calendars 
 Earnings 
 IPOs 
 Stock splits 
 Economic events 

 Research 
 AlphaSpace 

 Stock picks 

 Screeners 
 Stocks 
 Most shorted 
 Most active penny stocks 
 Analyst strong buy 

 Stock comparison 
 NVDA vs INTC 
 NVDA vs AMD 
 GOOG vs AMZN 
 AAPL vs MSFT 
 TSLA vs RIVN 

 Currency converter 
 Advanced charts 
 Investment ideas 

 Research reports 

 Community 

 Personal Finance 
 My Money BETA 
 Credit cards 
 Compare Credit Cards 
 Best 0% APR cards 
 Best balance transfer cards 
 Best rewards cards 
 Best travel cards 

 Banking 
 Best CD rates 
 Best high-yield savings accounts 
 Best money market accounts 
 Best free checking accounts 
 Best online banks 

 Mortgage 
 Best mortgage lenders 
 Best mortgage rates 
 Mortgage refinance 
 First time homebuyer 
 Mortgage payment calculator 
 Home affordability calculator 

 Insurance 
 Find car insurance 
 Types of car insurance 
 Find life insurance 

 Taxes 
 How to file 
 Tax brackets and rates 
 Child tax credit 
 Tax extension 
 Tax refund status 

 Student loans 
 Federal vs. private 
 How to apply 
 FAFSA 2026-27 
 Student loan assistance 

 Personal loans 
 Best personal loans 
 Improve credit score 
 How to get approved 

 Calculators 
 All Calculators 
 50/30/20 Budget Calculator 
 Compound Interest Calculator 
 Savings Calculator 
 Savings Goal Calculator 
 Social Security Calculator 

 Watch 
 Watch Now 
 Shows 
 The 8:30 
 Sozzi Unleashed 
 The Daily Wolf 
 Market Hang 
 In the Loop 
 Built Different 
 How They Run 
 Power Players 
 The Big Idea 
 Trader Talk 

 Latest 
 Must-watch Interviews 
 Fed Watch 
 ETF Report 
 FA Corner 

 ... 

 Network 

 AlphaSpace 

 Get Finance Plus 

 U.S. markets close in 2h 35m

 US Markets US Markets 

Europe Markets 

Asia Markets 

Cryptocurrencies 

Rates 

Commodities 

Currencies 

 U.S. markets close in 2h 35m
 S&P 500 7,803.91 -15.02 -0.19%

 Dow 30 51,241.94 -279.34 -0.54%

 Nasdaq 27,503.12 -96.76 -0.35%

 Russell 2000 2,800.14 -30.15 -1.07%

 10-Yr Bond 5.27 +0.00 +0.04%

 VIX 15.26 +0.25 +1.67%

 Gold 4,146.90 -40.20 -0.96%

 Bitcoin USD 83,276.32 -2,443.06 -2.85%

 Crude Oil Nov 26 88.49 -0.95 -1.06%

 ADVERTISEMENT 

 Watch Live Satya Nadella and Jensen Huang reveal Microsoft's new laptop powered by Nvidia's chips 

 Google Signs Nuclear Deal With Constellation Energy

 Eric Volkman, The Motley Fool 
 Wed, October 7, 2026 at 3:23 AM EDT 5 min read

 CEG 
 -0.68% 

 GOOG 
 -0.26% 

 NVDA 
 -0.82% 

 Explore stocks on Coinbase Trading disclosure 

 Trading disclosure 
 The above button links to Coinbase. Yahoo Finance is not a broker-dealer or investment adviser and does not offer securities or cryptocurrencies for sale or facilitate trading. Coinbase pays us for certain activity generated through this link. Prices displayed are informational. 
 Learn more 

 In a massive power generation deal agreed between two titans in their industries, Constellation Energy (NASDAQ:CEG) and Alphabet (NASDAQ:GOOG)(NASDAQ:GOOGL) have signed a pair of related long-term power purchase agreements (PPAs). 
 Alphabet, the parent company of eternal online search king Google, will buy 3.59 gigawatts of electricity from Constellation, the largest clean energy producer in the U.S. Of this, at least 890 megawatts will come from Constellation's nuclear assets. 

 Missed AI's "Act 1"? Act 2 Could Be 14x Bigger. Most investors think they missed the AI boat because they didn't buy Nvidia in 2005. But according to our analysts, we're only at the end of "Act 1"—the R&D phase. "Act 2" is the global rollout. Continue » 
 This pact is already a huge boon to Constellation -- whose stock justifiably zoomed 12% higher on Tuesday following the announcement; however, we probably can't say the same for the wider nuclear industry. Let's dig into the deal to see why. 

 Image source: Getty Images. 
 Thirst for power 
 The electricity will be consumed by Google, which, like many deep-pocketed and ambitious tech companies, is aiming to expand its network of artificial intelligence (AI) data centers. It's willing and able to fund a clutch of these projects with significantly increased capital expenditures (of almost $45 billion in the last reported quarter). Most of this spending is devoted to AI and advanced data center construction. 

 In its announcement of the deal, Constellation did not specify how much Alphabet/Google will pay for the 3.59 gigawatts of power, an immense amount by any standard. It did specify that 890 megawatts -- almost 25% of the total -- would be produced by the utility company's nuclear fleet (which, by the way, is by far the largest in this country with 21 reactors). The remainder is to be channeled through the PJM wholesale market, within which Constellation is the largest single power producer. As several of the company's nuclear plants supply PJM, it's likely the Google facilities will draw much more than that 890 megawatts from such sources. 
 The nuclear-exclusive part of the deal has a 20-year term. The additional 2.7 gigawatts is covered under a 15-year PPA. 
 Alphabet/Google isn't only getting power juice in the arrangement with Constellation. The latter company has committed to implementing Google Cloud and Alphabet's Gemini Enterprise AI solution as part of a five-year "technology alliance" to bolster its operations. 

 "For communities served by Constellation Energy, the aim is to use AI to reduce the costs of new infrastructure, improve performance, ensure enough power is generated to meet rising demand, and safeguard the energy grid they rely on," the electricity company wrote. 

 Story Continues 
 The new age of nuclear 
 Nuclear power has enjoyed quite the resurgence in the U.S. recently, thanks largely to AI. The technology is a resource hog, requiring vast amounts of power to support the heavy computing it performs. Nuclear proponents argue that it's the only form of energy, not to mention the sole green energy, which can service that kind of demand. 
 With this deal, Constellation will have plenty of coin to modernize and expand the capacity (or "uprate" in industry-speak) of its already considerable fleet -- it wrote in the press release that it'll devote a whopping $4.3 billion-plus to that purpose. Although we don't know how much Alphabet/Google is spending on all that Constellation electricity, the amount is obviously considerable if over $4 billion from it can be allocated to plant improvements. 

 So, in the end, this deal pushes Constellation even higher up the ladder of both nuclear and clean-energy power producers. After all, existing and active nuclear plants in this country operate at nearly full capacity, so a meaningful expansion of the power supply would require physical engineering uprates or new builds. And with fleets that are notably smaller than Constellation's, there's only so much capacity expansion possible, even with a generous infusion of capital. 
 While small modular reactor (SMR) technology holds much promise, these facilities take time (and, of course, plenty of capital) to build and deploy. Some projects are in advanced stages of development, but the earliest operational targets are in 2028. 
 Ultimately, I'd consider this deal a monster win for Constellation. However, this assumes that collaboration with Alphabet/Google goes smoothly; that's never a guarantee in the nuclear industry, which is subject to execution risks such as regulatory hiccups, cost overruns, construction delays, and other constraints. 

 Should you buy stock in Constellation Energy right now? 
 Before you buy stock in Constellation Energy, consider this: 
 The Motley Fool Stock Advisor analyst team just identified what they believe are the 10 best stocks for investors to buy now… and Constellation Energy wasn't one of them. The 10 stocks that made the cut could produce monster returns in the coming years. 
 Consider when Netflix made this list on December 17, 2004... if you invested $1,000 at the time of our recommendation, you'd have $364,023!* Or when Nvidia made this list on April 15, 2005... if you invested $1,000 at the time of our recommendation, you'd have $1,467,933!* 
 Now, it's worth noting Stock Advisor's total average return is 948% — a market-crushing outperformance compared to 214% for the S&P 500. Don't miss the latest top 10 list, available with Stock Advisor, and join an investing community built by individual investors for individual investors. 
 See the 10 stocks » 
 *Stock Advisor returns as of October 7, 2026. 
 Eric Volkman has no position in any of the stocks mentioned. The Motley Fool has positions in and recommends Alphabet and Constellation Energy. The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy. 
 Google Signs Nuclear Deal With Constellation Energy was originally published by The Motley Fool 

 View Comments 

 Terms and Privacy Policy 
 Privacy Dashboard 
 More Info

 Recommended Stories

 Copyright © 2026 Yahoo. All rights reserved.

 Trending Topics
 Dow Jones S&P 500 DAX Index Nvidia Tesla DJT Tariffs 
 Explore Further
 Mortgages Credit Cards Sectors Crypto Heatmap Financial News 
 About
 Data Disclaimer Help Feedback Sitemap Licensing What's New About Our Ads Premium Plans Terms and Privacy Policy 
 Privacy Dashboard 
 More Info

 ADVERTISEMENT 

 Edit your Dock

 More News

 Terms and Privacy Policy 
 Privacy Dashboard 
 Ad Terms Feedback More Info
