 Claude Haiku 5.5 migration guide - Claude Platform Docs 
 Claude Platform Docs 
 Messages 
 Managed Agents 
 Admin 
 Resources  Best practices 
 Models & pricing  
 SDKs, CLI, and libraries 
 Claude API skill 
 Release notes 
  API reference 
  English  
  Console Log in 
  
  Search Ctrl K 
 Models
 Models overview Claude Fable 5.1 
 Claude Opus 5.5 
 Claude Sonnet 5.5 
 Claude Haiku 5.5 
 Overview What's new Migration guide 
 Specialized models  
 Legacy models  
 Guides
 Choosing a model Optimizing for cost and intelligence Upgrade between model versions 
 Lifecycle and reference
 Model IDs and versioning Model deprecations Model cards Pricing API credits for subscribers System prompts 
  Console 
 Models & pricing  Claude Haiku 5.5 
 Claude Haiku 5.5 migration guide
  Copy page 
  
 Switch to Claude Haiku 5.5 from earlier Haiku models with this migration guide. The guidance to enable Claude Haiku 5.5 includes the new model ID, each breaking change with the request before and after, and a checklist for each starting model.
  Copy page 
  
  This guide covers migrating Messages API code. If you use Claude Managed Agents , no changes beyond updating the model name are required.
  Automate your migration with the Claude API skill. In Claude Code, run /claude-api migrate to invoke the bundled Claude API skill . It works for any current Claude model as the target:
 /claude-api migrate this project to claude-haiku-5-5 
  
 The skill applies the model ID swap and, as needed, breaking parameter changes, prefill replacement, and effort calibration for your target model across your code base, then produces a checklist of items to verify manually. It asks you to confirm the migration scope (entire working directory, a subdirectory, or a specific file list) before editing any files. The skill also detects Amazon Bedrock and Claude Platform on AWS clients and adjusts model ID formats and feature changes for those platforms.
 This guide covers moving code that calls Claude Haiku 4.5 to Claude Haiku 5.5. For code that calls Claude Haiku 3.5 or Claude Haiku 3, also make the changes in Migrating to Claude Haiku 5.5 from Claude Haiku 3.5 and earlier Haiku models . To move up to a Sonnet or Opus model instead, see Upgrade between model versions . For how long Claude Haiku 4.5 stays available, see Model deprecations .
 Migration checklist by starting model  
 Work down the groups and stop after the one that names your current model. If you are on Claude Haiku 4.5, the first group is the whole list. Each item is one change to make in your code.
 Every starting model  
 Replace the model ID with the Claude Haiku 5.5 ID for your platform. See Use the Claude Haiku 5.5 model ID .
 Recount your prompts, and revisit max_tokens limits and cost estimates, because the same text counts as more tokens. See Recount tokens .
 If your requests send thinking: {"type": "enabled", "budget_tokens": N} , change thinking to {"type": "adaptive"} . See Configure thinking .
 If your code reads the first content block as the answer, select blocks by type instead. See Configure thinking .
 Remove temperature , top_p , and top_k from your requests. See Remove sampling parameters .
 If your requests end messages with an assistant turn for the model to continue, end them with a user turn instead. See Replace assistant prefill .
 If you use computer use on the Claude API or Google Cloud, move from computer_20250124 to the computer_toolset_20260801 toolset. See Move computer use to the toolset .
 If you replay stored conversations through a different account, replay each one through the account that produced it. See Replay thinking blocks through the account that produced them .
 If your code changes system , tools , or earlier messages between requests in a conversation and sends thinking blocks back, keep the conversation append-only. See Keep earlier turns unchanged .
 Handle stop_reason: "refusal" . Claude Haiku 5.5 runs safety classifiers that can decline a request, and it has no server-side fallback. See Safeguard refusals .
 If your organization has a Priority Tier commitment on Claude Haiku 4.5, plan capacity separately: Priority Tier is not supported on Claude Haiku 5.5.
 Claude Haiku 3.5 or earlier  
 Replace the Claude Haiku 3.5 or Claude Haiku 3 model ID with the Claude Haiku 5.5 ID for your platform. See Migrating to Claude Haiku 5.5 from Claude Haiku 3.5 and earlier Haiku models .
 If you use the legacy code_execution_20250522 tool, move to code_execution_20250825 or later.
 If you use the text editor tool, move to text_editor_20250728 .
 Handle the refusal and model_context_window_exceeded stop reasons.
 If your code matches tool call string parameters exactly, allow for trailing newlines.
 Review your prompts.
 Use the Claude Haiku 5.5 model ID  
 Replace the Claude Haiku 4.5 model ID with the Claude Haiku 5.5 ID for your platform.
 Platform Claude Haiku 4.5 Claude Haiku 5.5 
 Claude API claude-haiku-4-5-20251001 or claude-haiku-4-5 claude-haiku-5-5 
 Amazon Bedrock anthropic.claude-haiku-4-5 anthropic.claude-haiku-5-5 
 Claude Platform on AWS claude-haiku-4-5 claude-haiku-5-5 
 Google Cloud claude-haiku-4-5@20251001 claude-haiku-5-5 
 Microsoft Foundry claude-haiku-4-5 claude-haiku-5-5 
 claude-haiku-5-5 is a fixed model ID with no date suffix and no separate alias.
 Recount tokens  
 Claude Haiku 5.5 uses the same newer tokenizer as Claude 4.7 and later models. As with all models that use this tokenizer, the same input text produces approximately 30% more tokens on Claude Haiku 5.5 than on Claude Haiku 4.5. The exact increase depends on the content. Requests, responses, and streaming events keep the same shape. What changes is anything you measure or budget in tokens:
 usage fields and token counting results are higher for the same text.
 A given number of tokens holds less text.
 A max_tokens limit tuned for Claude Haiku 4.5 may cut off equivalent output.
 Cost estimates made from Claude Haiku 4.5's token counts need recomputing with Claude Haiku 5.5's counts and prices .
 Count your prompts with model set to claude-haiku-5-5 rather than reusing counts measured on Claude Haiku 4.5.
 Configure thinking  
 Claude Haiku 5.5 configures thinking differently from Claude Haiku 4.5. A thinking value of {"type": "enabled", "budget_tokens": N} returns a 400 error, so a request that sends it needs a new thinking value.
 Before, a request to Claude Haiku 4.5 set thinking to enabled with a token budget:
 { 
 "model" : "claude-haiku-4-5" , 
 "max_tokens" : 16000 , 
 "thinking" : { "type" : "enabled" , "budget_tokens" : 8000 }, 
 "messages" : [{ "role" : "user" , "content" : "..." }] 
 } 
  
 After, the same request to Claude Haiku 5.5 uses adaptive thinking. The thinking value changes, and output_config.effort sets how much the model thinks:
 { 
 "model" : "claude-haiku-5-5" , 
 "max_tokens" : 16000 , 
 "thinking" : { "type" : "adaptive" }, 
 "output_config" : { "effort" : "medium" }, 
 "messages" : [{ "role" : "user" , "content" : "..." }] 
 } 
  
 Adaptive thinking is on by default, so a response can begin with one or more thinking blocks even when the request doesn't set thinking . Leave thinking unset or set it to {"type": "adaptive"} , and use effort as the lever: where Claude Haiku 4.5 ran without thinking, or with a small budget to save tokens, choose a lower effort level. At a lower level the model thinks less, and it can skip thinking entirely on simpler requests. For prompting guidance, see Use effort to control thinking . Select content blocks by their type field rather than by position, and pass thinking blocks back unmodified with tool results.
 Thinking tokens count toward max_tokens , so a request with a small max_tokens can stop with stop_reason: "max_tokens" after a thinking block and before any text. If you set a small max_tokens for Claude Haiku 4.5, raise it to leave room for thinking, or choose a lower effort level.
 By default, Claude Haiku 5.5 returns each thinking block with an empty thinking field and only a signature , where Claude Haiku 4.5 returned summarized thinking. To receive summarized thinking, set thinking: {"type": "adaptive", "display": "summarized"} .
 Claude Haiku 5.5 accepts a forced tool_choice ( any or a named tool), but the response starts with the tool call and has no thinking block. To let the model think before it calls a tool, use tool_choice: {"type": "auto"} and say in the prompt when to use the tool.
 Remove sampling parameters  
 Claude Haiku 4.5 accepts temperature , top_p , and top_k . On Claude Haiku 5.5, omit all three and use prompting to guide the model's behavior instead. If a request includes temperature , it must be 1 . If it includes top_p , it must be 0.99 , its default. Any other temperature or top_p value returns a 400 error, including a top_p of 1 . So does any top_k value, and so does a request that includes both temperature and top_p .
 Replace assistant prefill  
 A prefill is a final assistant turn in messages that the model continues. Claude Haiku 4.5 accepts one when thinking is off. Claude Haiku 5.5 rejects it with a 400 error, even with thinking turned off. End messages with a user turn, and replace each prefill according to what it was for:
 Output format: use structured outputs , or tools with enum fields for classification. On Claude in Amazon Bedrock, which doesn't support structured outputs, use tools.
 Preambles: ask in the system prompt for a direct answer.
 Continuations: move them to the user message, for example "Your previous response was interrupted and ended with [previous_response] . Continue from where you left off."
 Context reminders: put them in the user turn.
 Move computer use to the toolset  
 Claude Haiku 4.5 supports computer use through the computer_20250124 tool, with the computer-use-2025-01-24 beta header. On the Claude API and Google Cloud, Claude Haiku 5.5 supports computer use only through the computer_toolset_20260801 toolset, and a request that declares computer_20250124 returns a 400 error.
 To move an integration, drop the computer-use-2025-01-24 beta header and replace the tools entry with {"type": "computer_toolset_20260801"} . Then make the other request and agent-loop changes in Migrate from computer_20251124 : dispatch on each member tool_use block's name and toolset_name rather than on input.action , handle every such block in a turn, and echo toolset_name on results. Zoom is on by default in the toolset; if your environment doesn't implement it, add "configs": {"zoom": {"enabled": false}} . If you send the fine-grained-tool-streaming-2025-05-14 beta header, remove it. Alongside a toolset entry, it returns a 400 error. For other platforms, see the computer use tool's Compatibility section.
 On the Claude API and Google Cloud, Claude Haiku 5.5 also supports the browser use tool ( browser_toolset_20260801 ) for tasks inside webpages. Claude Haiku 4.5 doesn't support it.
 Replay thinking blocks through the account that produced them  
 Thinking blocks from Claude Haiku 5.5 work only in the account that produced them, or in an account linked to it. When another account sends one of these blocks, the API drops the block before the model sees it, and the request succeeds without that reasoning. This affects code that stores conversations and replays them through a different account, for example a service that serves several customers from one conversation store. Replay each conversation through the account that produced it. See Thinking blocks stay with the account that produced them .
 Keep earlier turns unchanged  
 A Claude Haiku 5.5 thinking block stays valid only while everything sent before it is unchanged: a request that sends a thinking block back after a change to system , tools , or earlier messages returns a 400 error. Claude Haiku 4.5 doesn't run this check. Keep conversations append-only. On accounts created before August 31, 2026, 00:00 UTC, the error comes only on requests that set thinking.block_binding.prefix_mismatch_behavior . For the changes that trigger the error and what to do instead, see Who needs to change anything .
 Migrating to Claude Haiku 5.5 from Claude Haiku 3.5 and earlier Haiku models  
 Claude Haiku 3.5 is retired on the Claude API and Amazon Bedrock, and Claude Haiku 3 is retired on the Claude API. Requests to a retired model fail. Google Cloud lists Claude Haiku 3.5 as deprecated and available only to existing customers. See Model deprecations .
 From either model, first apply every preceding section, then these changes:
 Model ID: Replace claude-3-5-haiku-20241022 , its alias claude-3-5-haiku-latest , or claude-3-haiku-20240307 with claude-haiku-5-5 . On Google Cloud, replace claude-3-5-haiku@20241022 with claude-haiku-5-5 . On Amazon Bedrock, use the Claude Haiku 5.5 ID from Use the Claude Haiku 5.5 model ID .
 Code execution: Claude Haiku 5.5 accepts code_execution_20250825 and later versions. If you use the legacy Python-only code_execution_20250522 , move to one of them. See Upgrade to latest tool version .
 Text editor: If you use the text editor tool, move to text_editor_20250728 (tool name str_replace_based_edit_tool ), which has no undo_edit command. See Text editor tool .
 Stop reasons: Handle refusal and model_context_window_exceeded . See Handling stop reasons .
 Trailing newlines: Claude 4.5 and later models keep trailing newlines in tool call string parameters. If your code matches those strings exactly, allow for them.
 Prompts: Claude 4 and later models have a more concise, direct communication style and need explicit direction. Review your prompts against Prompting Claude Haiku 5.5 and prompting best practices .
 Was this page helpful?
   
 Migration checklist by starting model 
 Every starting model 
 Claude Haiku 3.5 or earlier 
 Use the Claude Haiku 5.5 model ID 
 Recount tokens 
 Configure thinking 
 Remove sampling parameters 
 Replace assistant prefill 
 Move computer use to the toolset 
 Replay thinking blocks through the account that produced them 
 Keep earlier turns unchanged 
 Migrating to Claude Haiku 5.5 from Claude Haiku 3.5 and earlier Haiku models 
 Claude Platform Docs 
   
 Solutions
 AI agents 
 Code modernization 
 Coding 
 Customer support 
 Financial services 
 Government 
 Higher education 
 K-12 teachers 
 Life sciences 
 Partners
 Claude on AWS 
 Claude on Google Cloud 
 Learn
 Blog 
 Courses 
 Use cases 
 Connectors 
 Customer stories 
 Engineering at Anthropic 
 Events 
 Powered by Claude 
 Service partners 
 Startups program 
 Company
 Anthropic 
 Careers 
 Economic Futures 
 Research 
 News 
 Responsible Scaling Policy 
 Security and compliance 
 Transparency 
 Learn
 Blog 
 Courses 
 Use cases 
 Connectors 
 Customer stories 
 Engineering at Anthropic 
 Events 
 Powered by Claude 
 Service partners 
 Startups program 
 Help and security
 Availability 
 Status 
 Support 
 Discord 
 Terms and policies
 Privacy policy 
 Responsible disclosure policy 
 Terms of service: Commercial 
 Terms of service: Consumer 
 Usage policy 
 Ask Docs  
 