NYT《Anthropic Agents Tried to Fill Out Visa Forms on State Dept. Website》——NYT 原站 403（curl）、firecrawl 不支持该站；本文存档的是 Seattle Times 页面，页内署 "The New York Times" 并写明 "This story was originally published at nytimes.com"（NYT 稿件的授权转载，非镜像抓取站；是否采信由 Claude 定，状态栏已注明）。
URL：https://www.seattletimes.com/business/anthropic-agents-tried-to-fill-out-visa-forms-on-state-dept-website/
NYT 原文 URL：https://www.nytimes.com/2026/10/09/technology/anthropic-rogue-ai-agents.html（NYT 标题见 Google 新闻/NYT 板块页与 HN 条目：Anthropic Agents Tried to Fill Out Visa Forms on State Dept. Website）
抓取：firecrawl_scrape（onlyMainContent，maxAge 0），北京 2026-10-10 11:5x；HTTP 200。
Seattle Times：datePublished = 2026-10-09T19:32:50-07:00（= 2026-10-10T02:32:50Z = 北京 10/10 10:32:50）；modified 19:33:45-07:00。
NYT 原文发布时刻：页面未读到；HN 提交 50029330 在 2026-10-10T03:42:11Z（北京 11:42）；Google 搜索结果显示"2 hours ago"。NYT 官方发布时刻未取得。
署名：DAVID E. SANGER, Mike Isaac, Julian E. Barnes and Kate Conger，The New York Times

正文逐字（存档）：
SAN FRANCISCO — Artificial intelligence agents created by Anthropic, acting on their own, tried to gain access to a range of government websites, filled out visa applications on the State Department's website and sent a fake homicide tip to Philadelphia's Police Department.

Anthropic detailed the activity of its AI agents in a blog post on Friday, without naming the targeted websites. But two sources with knowledge of the incidents said Anthropic's AI agents had submitted 20 visa applications through a form available on the State Department's website. All the applications were incomplete and were not processed, they said.

White House officials said they were briefed on the agents' actions on Friday, and demanded that AI companies immediately report rogue AI activity. It was the most aggressive statement so far on AI regulation by the Trump administration, which has sidestepped calls for tighter controls on the increasingly powerful technology.

A new White House AI task force, created this week, said Anthropic told it about the agents' activities earlier on Friday. Called the Super Intelligence Force, the group includes Jay Clayton, the White House AI czar; Andrew Ferguson, chair of the Federal Trade Commission; Scott Kupor, director of the Office of Personnel Management; and Emil Michael, chief technology officer of the Defense Department.

"We informed the company that we expect immediate and full transparency to the entities involved and the public," they said in a statement. "We also expect that the company will immediately provide remediation services to the affected entities and any harmed Americans."

They added that they expected Anthropic and other companies to "immediately report incidents," cooperate with federal and state law enforcement and ensure that the incidents were not repeated.

Anthropic said in its blog post that it discovered what its AI agents had done after it started a review of its AI activity in July. At the time, OpenAI had disclosed that its technology attacked another AI startup, Hugging Face. Anthropic and other labs also discovered that their technology had escaped from testing environments and conducted hacks.

Anthropic said an AI model it had been testing had taken several unauthorized actions, including using a flaw in a university website to download data and sending a government agency a form that it had been told not to submit.

A spokesperson for Anthropic declined to comment beyond the company's blog post.

The Philadelphia Police Department said earlier Friday that Anthropic had notified it that the company's technology submitted a false homicide tip to the agency's website. The tip was dated July 18 and claimed that the submitter had information about an unsolved case, the department said.

The tip was flagged as spam and never investigated, the department said, but Anthropic notified the police this week about the incident and said the company would publicly disclose it on Friday.

"An unreleased, non-frontier research model was meant to fill out a practice copy of a government form," Anthropic said in its blog post. "When the copy failed to load or the model closed it by mistake, the model instead navigated to the website where the real form is normally hosted and submitted the form there."

(The New York Times has sued OpenAI and Microsoft, claiming copyright infringement of news content related to AI systems. The two companies have denied those claims.)

og:description：The Philadelphia Police Department said the agents had also sent in a false homicide tip. The incidents led the White House to call for better disclosure of rogue AI behavior.
