25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 1 of 9

UNITED STATES BANKRUPTCY COURT

SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

---------------------------------------------------------------x

                                :

In re                           :                                 Chapter 11
                                                                  Case No. 25-11897-SHL
                                :                                 (Jointly Administered)

SPIRIT AVIATION HOLDINGS, INC., et al., :

                                :

                                :

       Debtors.1                :

---------------------------------------------------------------x

           CONSUMER PRIVACY OMBUDSMAN
       SUPPLEMENTAL REPORT TO THE COURT

         ON THE SALE OF DEIDENTIFIED DATA

                                                                        October 5, 2026

                                                                        Lucy L. Thomson
                                                                        Consumer Privacy Ombudsman

                                                                        The Willard, Suite 400
                                                                        1455 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
                                                                        Washington, D.C. 20004
                                                                        (703) 212-8770
                                                                        lucythomson_cpo@earthlink.net

1 The Debtors’ names and last four digits of their respective employer identification numbers are as follows: Spirit
Aviation Holdings, Inc. (1797); Spirit Airlines, LLC (7023); Spirit Finance Cayman 1 Ltd. (7020); Spirit Finance
Cayman 2 Ltd. (7362); Spirit IP Cayman Ltd. (4732); and Spirit Loyalty Cayman Ltd. (4752). The Debtors’ mailing
address is 1731 Radiant Drive, Dania Beach, FL 33004.
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 2 of 9

     I. Bankruptcy Code Privacy Framework and Recommendations
          Pursuant to Bankruptcy Code section 332(b), Lucy L. Thomson, the Consumer Privacy

 Ombudsman (“CPO” or “Ombudsman”) appointed in this case, submitted her Report to the Court
 on September 8, 2026 to advise the Court on the issues related to privacy and the protection of
 personally identifiable information (PII) of the consumers/ passengers of Spirit Aviation Holdings,
 Inc. d/b/a Spirit Airlines, LLC (“Debtors” or “Spirit”). (Doc. No. 1581)

          The CPO Report focused on the factors set forth in the Bankruptcy Code that the
 Ombudsman may address, including information relating to:

      The Debtors’ Privacy Policy;
      Potential losses or gains of privacy to consumers if the sale is approved;
      Potential costs or benefits to consumers if the sale is approved; and
      Possible alternatives that would mitigate potential privacy losses or costs to consumers.

            11 U.S.C. § 332.
          This Supplement provides observations and recommendations for the Court’s
 consideration in deciding whether to approve the sale of the deidentified data.2
          As a result of ongoing discussions among the Debtors, the successful bidder, Google, and
 the Ombudsman, the parties have taken consequential steps to protect the privacy of the personal
 data of the Spirit consumers:
      Revised the scope of the consumer personal data to be included in the sale of the
          deidentified data.
      Excluded passenger databases from the sale to eliminate much of the Spirit passenger PII.

 2 This filing supplements and does not supersede the September 8, 2026 CPO Report to the Court, which the
 Ombudsman incorporates by reference, and addresses developments since that date.

                                                                                                                     2
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 3 of 9

      Hired a Deidentification Agent, Tonic.ai, to deidentify unstructured data such as corporate
          e-mails that may contain consumer personal information.
          These changes will significantly reduce the potential risk of harm to the 97 million

 consumers who provided their personal data to Spirit for the purpose of booking airline travel. By
 excluding the structured Spirit passenger systems from the sale, that data will not be subject to
 deidentification and will not be provided to the successful bidder in any form, deidentified or not.

          Unstructured consumer personal data that may be present in corporate systems such as e-
 mail will be deidentified before it is transferred to the successful bidder. (Discussed in section II.
 B. infra). As proposed by the Debtors, prior to any transfer of the Spirit data to the successful
 bidder, and for every transfer thereafter from the Debtors to the successful bidder, the third party
 expert (the Deidentification Agent) will deliver to the Debtors, for filing with the Court, a
 certification that the Court-approved procedures were performed and that, in the Agent's
 professional opinion, the transferred data is deidentified. The certification should include a general
 description of the deidentified data. The Ombudsman recommends that it should also provide a
 description of the scope and number of individual Spirit passengers in the unstructured data whose
 personal information was detected and deidentified.

          In conclusion, the Ombudsman recommends to the Court that from a privacy perspective,
 approval of the sale of the deidentified data would be appropriate.3 The potential privacy losses or
 costs to consumers have been eliminated or mitigated.4 The sale would not violate any applicable
 non-bankruptcy laws.

 3 The Ombudsman did not investigate or reach any conclusion about whether the data offered for sale or the
 deidentification process to be followed presents any risks to affected employees or third parties.
 4 As discussed in the September 8, 2026 CPO Report to the Court, this bankruptcy sale presents challenging issues
 in which law and technology are interrelated. It illustrates that with respect to the protection of personal data and
 deidentification, technology has far outpaced the law, potentially putting consumers at risk of significant harm if
 their deidentified personal data is reidentified and misused or stolen, or if AI makes inferences about individuals

                                                                                                                     3
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 4 of 9

    II. Digital Assets to Be Sold – Deidentified Spirit Passenger Data

          Through an initial auction completed on Friday, August 13, 2026,5 the Debtors proposed

 to sell enterprise data derived from the company’s operations that include “deidentified data”

 pertaining to approximately 190 million airline flights taken by Spirit passengers, including

 productivity and collaboration data, core business systems, and workflow and process data.6

          Debtors’ counsel advised the Ombudsman that the categories of enterprise data originally

 planned for this sale included eight systems that had multiple processing purposes, some of which

 may have involved the processing of personal data, but others did not.7

 based on combining deidentified data with data from other sources, and that information is disclosed without
 authorization. While properly deidentified data has a very low risk of re-identification, combining it with external
 datasets or using insufficient deidentification methods can potentially reveal individual identities.
 5 Notice of Auction Results and Scheduled Hearing for the Deidentified Data (Doc. No. 1463, filed 8/14/26). The
 Debtors selected Google LLC (the “Successful Bidder”) as the highest and best bid and Mercor.io Corporation (the
 “Alternate Bidder”) as the Alternate Bid.
 Google LLC is a multi-national technology company that offers hundreds of products and services spanning search,
 consumer software, enterprise cloud, mobile operating systems, and hardware.
 Mercor.io is an AI data and recruiting startup founded in 2023 that connects specialized human experts with top AI
 labs and enterprises to train advanced AI models.
 micro1, a human-data and intelligence platform for AI training, filed a Notice of Intent to Submit a competing and
 superior bid for the deidentified data. (Doc. No. 1556, filed 9/3/26).
 6 The original list of the assets included within the Deidentified Data can be found in the Asset Schedule attached to
 the Notice of Auction Results and Scheduled Hearing for the Deidentified Data. Sale Agreement between Google
 LLC and Spirit Airlines, LLC, Section 1(c) (attached as Exhibit A, Doc. No. 1463 at 18).
 7 The enterprise data assets encompass the following types of information:

       Productivity & collaboration data, including email and calendar data, document repositories (e.g.,
      SharePoint/ OneDrive), chat and collaboration messages, and wikis/ knowledge base.
       Core business systems, including customer behavior (CRM), employee behavior and productivity data,
      revenue and yield management (inventory) data, and aircraft operation and logistics data.
       Workflow & process data, including finance, marketing, support/HR/ legacy, strategy and operations, and

            project management data.
      Eight systems that might include customer data:
       Revenue Transactions / PNR Data (confirmation numbers), Refunds, Inflight Purchases, Timecard

            information, WiFi Sales, Corporate emails (includes employee data and possibly marginal consumer data).
      Systems that would include employee data: Concur, Employee business travel records.
    The deidentified data does not include, and is not being derived from, databases relating to customer insights,
    customer profiles, Free Spirit member data, savers club data, social media data, and survey data. No biometric or
    geolocation data will be included in the sale.

                                                                                                                     4
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 5 of 9

     A. Databases Excluded to Eliminate Consumer PII from the Sale

          The parties have made significant changes to the digital assets offered for sale. The Debtors
 and Google, the successful bidder, have agreed to exclude from the scope of the sale transaction
 key databases that contain consumer personal data.

          The following datasets will not be part of the sale transaction and will not be provided to
 Google in any form (deidentified or otherwise): 8

     B. Consumer Transaction Systems – i.e., Transactions, Passenger Name Record (PNR)
     C. Refund systems
     D. Inflight/Onboard Purchases
     E. WiFi sales
     F. Others TBD
 A. Deidentification of Unstructured Data that May Contain Personal Data

          Unstructured personal data is information about an identifiable person that does not have a
 predefined format, data model, or organization, making it difficult to search. Examples of
 unstructured personal data include:

      Text and Communications: Emails, text messages, direct messages, workplace chat logs,
          and customer support notes containing names, complaints, or personal stories.

      Multimedia: Voice recordings, customer service call audio, videos, and photographs or
          security footage that capture an individual's likeness or voice.

      Social Media: User posts, comments, and profile biographies that reveal personal habits,
          locations, or opinions.

 8 The Ombudsman has been provided a draft revised asset schedule reflecting these changes. She has been assured
 that while this list is still subject to change, any system designated as excluded (i.e., not included) will remain
 excluded and will not be moved back into scope.

                                                                                                                     5
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 6 of 9

      Documents and Files: Resumes, Word documents, PDF reports, and handwritten notes
          that mention personal details
          Corporate emails that include employee data and possibly consumer personal data will be

 included in the sale. Debtors structured the bid process so that systems included in the sale that
 contain personal data will be subject to a deidentification process designed to remove personal
 data prior to transmission to the successful bidder.

          The process for deidentification of the unstructured consumer data the Debtors have
 adopted is designed to meet the latest professional standards. Debtors have hired Tonic.ai
 (“Deidentification Agent”) to conduct the data deidentification.9
 https://www.tonic.ai/solutions/use-case/company-data-de-identification. The Ombudsman was
 provided an opportunity to meet with the vendor and learn about the process that will be followed.

      Deidentification Standards
          In a letter dated August 5, 2026, Debtors’ counsel advised the Ombudsman that in the

 interest of protecting consumer privacy, Spirit intends voluntarily to apply “the deidentification
 standards enunciated by the modern state privacy laws and the FTC” and reflected in the Sale
 Agreement. Specifically, the Debtors and the successful bidder have voluntarily agreed to follow
 the deidentification standard adopted in the California Consumer Privacy Act (“CCPA”) (Cal. Civ.
 Code § 1798.140(m)) for the deidentification process for this sale. They intend to –

          (1) take reasonable measures to ensure that data cannot be associated with a natural person,
          (2) require a purchaser to publicly commit to maintaining and using deidentified data
          without attempting reidentification, and

 9 The Ombudsman did not investigate or reach any conclusion about whether the data offered for sale or the
 deidentification process to be followed presents any risks to affected employees or third parties.

                                                                                                                     6
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 7 of 9

          (3) contractually prohibit a purchaser from onward transferring deidentified data to a third
          party unless the third party enters into a similar public commitment.
          The Successful Bid expressly incorporates the three requirements set forth under that
 standard for deidentification, and will require an independent third party to conduct the
 deidentification based upon industry standards and practice.
      Verification of Deidentification and Certification
          It is critical that before any Spirit passenger data is transferred to Google, an independent
 third party, the Deidentification Agent, has assured the Court that the personal data has been
 appropriately deidentified using a standard that is reasonably designed to prevent reidentification.
 The Deidentification Agent shall perform and document quality-control testing reasonably
 designed to assess whether individuals may remain identifiable through direct identifiers, indirect
 identifiers, free-text content, unique characteristics, record linkage, or other means.
          The certified completion of this deidentification is a closing condition under the Sale
 Agreement, meaning that the sale will only occur and thus data will only be transferred to Google
 if and when the data is deidentified (meaning it no longer contains personal data).
          Prior to any transfer, and for every transfer thereafter, the third party expert will file an
 affidavit with the Court certifying that the data transferred has been deidentified. The affidavit will
 include a general description of the deidentified data. The Ombudsman recommends that it should
 also provide the number of individual Spirit passengers in the unstructured data whose personal
 information was detected and deidentified.

                                                                                                                     7
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 8 of 9

 B. Protection of Children and Teens
          The decision to exclude the Consumer Transaction Systems from the sale means that

 personal data related to children and teens will not be transferred to the successful bidder.
 Therefore, any privacy risks to children and teens no longer exist.
 C. Restrictions on Reidentification of the Deidentified Data

          The Sale Agreement requires the successful bidder publicly to commit to maintaining and
 using deidentified data without attempting reidentification.
 D. Reasonable and Appropriate Security in the AI Training Environment

          The successful bidder must provide reasonable and appropriate security for the deidentified
 personal data it receives. The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has found that
 mishandling the private information of consumers may be considered an unfair or deceptive
 practice.

          Google has published a paper titled Our Approach to Protecting AI Training Data that
 outlines its approach to cybersecurity for AI training data, highlights best practices in data
 protection, and describes how Google applies them in its systems.10
 E. Other Bidders

          The Notice of Auction Results and Scheduled Hearing for the Deidentified Data (Doc. No.
 1463, filed 8/14/26) advised that Mercor.io Corporation was selected as the Alternate Bid for this
 sale. Mercor.io is an AI data and recruiting startup that connects specialized human experts with
 top AI labs and enterprises to train advanced AI models. In early 2026, the company experienced
 a supply chain security incident. If the Court decides to consider the company as the successful
 bidder, the Ombudsman requests an opportunity to conduct further research into the circumstances

 10 Our Approach to Protecting AI Training Data, GOOGLE, https://research.google/pubs/our-approach-to-protecting-
 ai-training-data/

                                                                                                                     8
25-11897-shl Doc 1684 Filed 10/05/26 Entered 10/05/26 12:19:31 Main Document
                                                      Pg 9 of 9

 of this data breach, https://www.mercor.com/blog/update-on-mercor-security-incident/, and
 whether Mercor.io is an appropriate, qualified buyer. It must be determined if Mercor.io is willing
 to take steps sufficient to protect the privacy interests of Spirit’s consumers.

          micro1, a human-data and intelligence platform for AI training, filed a Notice of Intent to
 Submit a competing and superior bid for the deidentified data. (Doc. No. 1556, filed 9/3/26). The
 Debtors have structured the sale transaction so that a key component is having an independent
 expert conduct the deidentification of Spirit data. micro1 proposed to conduct the deidentification
 themselves and not to use an independent party. If the Court considers the company as the
 successful bidder, the Ombudsman requests an opportunity to conduct further research into their
 proposal and whether Micro1 is an appropriate, qualified buyer. It must be determined if Microl is
 willing to take steps sufficient to protect the privacy interests of Spirit’s consumers.

    III. Conclusion
          The issues related to the sale of the deidentified data of the more than 97 million Spirit

 passengers required under sections 332 and 363 of the Bankruptcy Code have been addressed for
 consideration by the Court, including compliance with the privacy policy, the application of non-
 bankruptcy laws, and the losses or gains, and costs or benefits to consumers, if the sale is approved.

          The CPO provided recommendations regarding practical steps the parties can take to
 protect the privacy of the Spirit consumers, many of which have been adopted. The CPO believes
 the Recommendations in this CPO Report strike an appropriate balance between the privacy rights
 of consumers and practical considerations associated with this bankruptcy sale. She stands ready
 to provide whatever further analysis or recommendations the Court deems appropriate.

                                                                         Respectfully submitted,
                                                                         Lucy L. Thomson
                                                                         Consumer Privacy Ombudsman

                                                                                                                     9
