25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 1 of 23

UNITED STATES BANKRUPTCY COURT

SOUTHERN DISTRICT OF NEW YORK

---------------------------------------------------------------x

                                :

In re                           :                                 Chapter 11
                                                                  Case No. 25-11897-SHL
                                :                                 (Jointly Administered)

SPIRIT AVIATION HOLDINGS, INC., et al., :

                                :

       Debtors.1                :

                                :

---------------------------------------------------------------x

       CONSUMER PRIVACY OMBUDSMAN
               REPORT TO THE COURT

                                                                  September 8, 2026

                                                                  Lucy L. Thomson
                                                                  Consumer Privacy Ombudsman

                                                                  The Willard, Suite 400
                                                                  1455 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
                                                                  Washington, D.C. 20004
                                                                  (703) 212-8770
                                                                  lucythomson_cpo@earthlink.net

1      The Debtors’ names and last four digits of their respective employer identification numbers are as follows:

Spirit Aviation Holdings, Inc. (1797); Spirit Airlines, LLC (7023); Spirit Finance Cayman 1 Ltd. (7020); Spirit

Finance Cayman 2 Ltd. (7362); Spirit IP Cayman Ltd. (4732); and Spirit Loyalty Cayman Ltd. (4752). The Debtors’

mailing address is 1731 Radiant Drive, Dania Beach, FL 33004.
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 2 of 23

     I. Bankruptcy Code Privacy Framework
          Pursuant to Bankruptcy Code section 332(b), Lucy L. Thomson, the Consumer Privacy

 Ombudsman (“CPO” or “Ombudsman”) appointed in this case,2 submits this Report to advise the

 Court on the issues related to privacy and the protection of personally identifiable information

 (PII) 3 of the consumers/ passengers of Spirit Aviation Holdings, Inc. d/b/a Spirit Airlines, LLC

 (“Debtors” or “Spirit”).

          Sections 332 and 363 provide a framework for evaluating the sale of personally identifiable

 consumer records in the context of a bankruptcy case. 11 U.S.C. §§ 101 et. seq. The Bankruptcy

 Code creates certain privacy protections for personal information that consumers provided to a

 company in connection with obtaining a product or service, i.e. airline transportation. Section

 363(b)(1) of the Bankruptcy Code provides that the sale may not violate non-bankruptcy laws.

          The Debtors have divided their digital assets into three groups: (1) Intellectual Property,

 (2) Personal Data, and (3) Deidentified Data. Through an initial auction completed on Friday,

 August 13, 2026, the Debtors propose to sell enterprise data derived from the company’s

 2 Pursuant to the Order approving the Stipulation and Agreed Order Directing the United States Trustee to Appoint a
 Consumer Privacy Ombudsman (Doc. No. 1332, filed July 15, 2026), the United States Trustee appointed Lucy L.
 Thomson as the Consumer Privacy Ombudsman in this case. (Doc. Nos. 1350 and 1351, filed 7/17/26) The Court
 approved this appointment on July 23, 2026 (Doc. No. 1380).
 3 Section 101 (41A) of the Bankruptcy Code defines the term "personally identifiable information" to mean –

     (A) if provided by an individual to the debtor in connection with obtaining a product or a service from the debtor
     primarily for personal, family, or household purposes –

          (i) the first name (or initial) and last name of such individual, whether given at birth or time of adoption, or
      resulting from a lawful change of name;

          (ii) the geographical address of a physical place of residence of such individual;
          (iii) an electronic address (including an e-mail address) of such individual;
          (iv) a telephone number dedicated to contacting such individual at such physical place of residence;
          (v) a social security account number issued to such individual; or
          (vi) the account number of a credit card issued to such individual; or
     (B) if identified in connection with 1 or more of the items of information specified in subparagraph (A) –
          (i) a birth date, the number of a certificate of birth or adoption, or a place of birth; or
          (ii) any other information concerning an identified individual that, if disclosed, will result in contacting or
       identifying such individual physically or electronically.

                                                                                                                     2
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 3 of 23

 operations that includes “deidentified data” pertaining to approximately 190 million airline flights
 taken by Spirit passengers. A subsequent auction to sell the personal data of the 97.5 million
 passengers will be conducted at a later date.

          Because of the data requirements of modern day air travel, the personal passenger data
 collected by Spirit is extensive and highly sensitive. While this sale transaction purports to exclude
 “personal data,” the sale of deidentified consumer information presents challenging and novel
 issues for the Court’s consideration.

          The Debtors have articulated their position that the sale of deidentified data of Spirit
 passengers to the successful bidder, a technology company that intends to use the data for training
 AI models, 4 is permissible under current applicable law and the Spirit privacy policy.

          This bankruptcy sale illustrates that with respect to the protection of personal data and
 deidentification, technology has far outpaced the law, potentially putting consumers at risk of
 significant harm if their deidentified personal data is reidentified and misused or stolen, or if AI
 makes inferences about individuals based on combining deidentified data with data from other
 sources, and that information is disclosed without authorization.

 4 Notice of Auction Results and Scheduled Hearing for the Deidentified Data (Doc. No. 1463, filed 8/14/26). The
 Debtors selected Google LLC (the “Successful Bidder”) as the highest and best bid (the “Successful Bid”) and
 Mercor.io Corporation (the “Alternate Bidder”) as the Alternate Bid.
 Google LLC is a multi-national technology company that offers hundreds of products and services spanning search,
 consumer software, enterprise cloud, mobile operating systems, and hardware.
 Mercor.io is an AI data and recruiting startup founded in 2023 that connects specialized human experts with top AI
 labs and enterprises to train advanced AI models. In early 2026, the company experienced a supply chain security
 incident. If the Court decides to consider the company as the successful bidder, the CPO requests an opportunity to
 conduct further research into the circumstances of this data breach. https://www.mercor.com/blog/update-on-
 mercor-security-incident/.
 micro1, a human-data and intelligence platform for AI training, filed a Notice of Intent to Submit a competing and
 superior bid for the deidentified data. (Doc. No. 1556, filed 9/3/26). If the Court decides to consider the company as
 the successful bidder, the CPO requests an opportunity to conduct further research into their proposal.

                                                                                                                     3
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 4 of 23

          The CPO believes it is helpful to address the significant impact the sale will have on the
 consumers who provided their personal data to Spirit for airline bookings, as well as recent legal
 requirements and technology developments with respect to deidentification that the Court may
 wish to take into consideration in making its decision regarding approval of the sale. Specifically,
 this CPO Report focuses on these factors set forth in the Bankruptcy Code that the Ombudsman
 may address, including information relating to:

          • The Debtors’ Privacy Policy;
          • Potential losses or gains of privacy to consumers if the sale is approved;
          • Potential costs or benefits to consumers if the sale is approved; and
          • Possible alternatives that would mitigate potential privacy losses or costs to consumers.

            11 U.S.C. § 332.
 Summary of Recommendations

          The Debtors and the successful bidder have voluntarily agreed to follow the up-to-date
 deidentification standard adopted within the California Consumer Privacy Act (“CCPA”) (Cal.
 Civ. Code § 1798.140(m)) for the deidentification process for this sale.

          The parties have made voluntary commitments on important issues related to the
 deidentification process; these are good first steps.

          This report recommends adoption of several conditions related to the following issues to
 mitigate the potential harm to the more than 97 million Spirit passengers that may result from this
 proposed sale:

          • Verification of Deidentification and Certification
          • Transparency
          • Protection of Children and Teens
          • Restrictions on Reidentification of the Deidentified Data
          • Reasonable and Appropriate Security in the AI Training Environment

                                                                                                                     4
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 5 of 23

          To ensure that this report is submitted on a timely basis, this CPO Report will be filed on
 Tuesday, September 8, 2026. Discussions with the CPO and counsel for the Debtors and the
 successful bidder about the recommendations are underway. Google, the successful bidder, has
 offered to narrow the types of personal data items to be included in the sale to reduce the likelihood
 that the data can be reidentified. This is a positive step and may lead to a successful sale. The risks
 to consumers discussed in this report should be read in light of Google’s proposal to remove data
 items from the sale. The final list of recommended conditions will be filed promptly.

    II. Assets to Be Sold – Deidentified Spirit Passenger Data
          Over the decades of its operations since 1992, Spirit has collected PII and other personal

 data of its passengers as follows:
     • Customer database and profiles (approximately 97.5 million passengers)
     • Customer email list (approximately 13.7 million active addresses)
     • Loyalty and co-brand cardholder lists (including Free Spirit portfolio and Savers Club)
          Spirit collected personal data from passengers for the purpose of booking airline flights

 and with the understanding that, as the privacy policy states: “We do not sell personal
 information.”5 A sale such as this, in which Spirit proposes to sell data to Google or the backup
 bidder for an entirely different purpose – the training of AI models – requires close scrutiny.

          This sale primarily includes enterprise data derived from the Company’s operations,
 including productivity and collaboration data, core business systems, and workflow and process
 data.6 Debtors’ counsel has advised the CPO that the categories of enterprise data in this sale

 5 Further, the Sharing of Information, section 1 “Affiliates and Acquisitions,” states that “If another company
 acquires, or plans to acquire, our company, business, or assets, we will also share information with that company,
 including at the negotiation stage.” The debtors position is that this section 1 supports the sale of all the deidentified
 personal data to the successful bidder.
 6 A complete list of the assets included within the Deidentified Data can be found in the Asset Schedule attached to
 the Notice of Auction Results and Scheduled Hearing for the Deidentified Data. Sale Agreement between Google

                                                                                                                     5
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 6 of 23

 include eight systems that had multiple processing purposes, some of which may have involved
 the processing of personal data, but others did not. Some of the databases contain identity-related
 information dating back to 2018. 7

          Of these eight systems, the flight reservations database and Revenue Transactions / PNR
 Data8 currently contain voluminous amounts of personal data collected by Spirit in connection
 with the booking of airline flights by and travel to the destinations of the more than 97 million
 passengers.

          With respect to consumer PII of Spirit passengers, the Sale Agreement states “Personal
 Data” is excluded from the sale as follows:

          “Assets shall not include information that relates to, describes, or is reasonably capable of
          being associated with a consumer or is otherwise considered ‘personal data’, ‘personal
          information’, ‘nonpublic personal information’ or other similar term under applicable data
          protection laws.” Sale Agreement § 1(a)(i).

 LLC and Spirit Airlines, LLC, Section 1(c) (attached as Exhibit A, Docket No. 1463 at 18) (note Deidentified Data
 excludes those rows marked “not included” and includes only those marked “included”).
 7 The enterprise data assets encompass the following types of information:

      • Productivity & collaboration data, including email and calendar data, document repositories (e.g.,
      SharePoint/ OneDrive), chat and collaboration messages, and wikis/ knowledge base.
      • Core business systems, including customer behavior (CRM), employee behavior and productivity data,
      revenue and yield management (inventory) data, and aircraft operation and logistics data.
      • Workflow & process data, including finance, marketing, support/HR/ legacy, strategy and operations, and

            project management data.
      Eight systems that might include customer data:
      • Revenue Transactions / PNR Data (confirmation numbers), Refunds, Inflight Purchases, Timecard

            information, WiFi Sales, Corporate emails (includes employee data and possibly marginal consumer data).
      Systems that would include employee data: Concur, Employee business travel records.
 8 A PNR (Passenger Name Record) is a unique six-character code that acts as the digital booking reference for a
 flight. It is also known as a record locator or booking code. https://www.cbp.gov/travel/clearing-cbp/passenger-
 name-record.

                                                                                                                     6
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 7 of 23

          Debtors structured the bid process so that pursuant to the Successful Bid these systems will
 be subject to a deidentification process designed to remove personal data prior to transmission to
 the winning bidder.

                                              What is Deidentification?
                 Deidentification is a process used to remove the link between a set of
                 identifying data and a specific individual. It strips personal identifiers
                 from a dataset so the remaining information cannot be easily tracked
                 back to a real person. Source: NIST

          The exclusion of “personal data” from this sale is premised on the theory that “deidentified
 data” under certain federal and state privacy laws is not considered “personal data.” A close look
 at the details of the sale process and the data to be sold illustrated in the table below suggests that
 until such time as any of the personal data is deidentified, it is the PII of Spirit passengers and
 requires strong protection for the future, particularly since the data will be used by the successful
 bidder for a different purpose than for which it was collected. Counsel for Google LLC, the
 successful bidder, advised the CPO that the deidentified data will be used for the training of
 artificial intelligence (AI) models.

          With the sale provisions in mind, the following table outlines the sale process to be
 followed in deidentifying the data. It identifies actions that will be taken and decisions to be made
 so the Court can assess the privacy issues at each point on the timeline. Protection of consumers
 at the deidentification planning stage is particularly important when decisions will be made about
 what consumer passenger data items to include in the deidentified data to be provided to the
 successful bidder.

                                                                                                                     7
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 8 of 23

                     Lifecycle of Sale Process – Spirit Consumer PII to be Deidentified

               Spirit Airlines owns the consumer PII               Court approves        Successful bidder
                                                                   the sale              owns the
            Consumer PII requires strong   protection                                    deidentified
                                             Third party will      Spirit transfers      consumer PII
Consumer             Spirit proposes to      follow generally      the deidentified
personal data (PII)  hire third party        accepted standards    data to the           Privacy laws
                                             that provide strong   successful            provide that the
collected for        expert to deidentify    protection for        bidder                deidentified data
airline bookings;    the consumer data       consumers;            Data to be used       is no longer
                                             Court to evaluate     to train AI models    considered PII
included in 8        (PII)                   and approve.
enterprise
                                             Personal identifiers
systems that may                             removed and other
contain consumer                             deidentification
                                             steps/ processes
data to be sold                              specified and
                                             applied
• 97+ million        Deidentification
     consumers       planning process –
                     identify direct and
• 190 million        indirect identifiers
     flights         to remove from

                     data systems and
                     other processes to

                     specify

  III. Technology Landscape and Consumer Risks – Deidentification Limitations

         Deidentification is particularly problematic in the age of AI, when AI and machine learning

can easily reidentify deidentified or anonymized data by matching patterns, behavioral tracks, or

auxiliary datasets. A decade ago, the National Institute Standards and Technology (NIST)

explained the purpose and risks of deidentification of personal data:

         De-identification removes identifying information from a dataset so that individual data
         cannot be linked with specific individuals. De-identification can reduce the privacy risk
         associated with collecting, processing, archiving, distributing or publishing information.
         De-identification thus attempts to balance the contradictory goals of using and sharing
         personal information while protecting privacy. Several U.S laws, regulations and policies
         specify that data should be de-identified prior to sharing. In recent years researchers have
         shown that some de-identified data can sometimes be re-identified. Many different kinds
         of information can be de-identified, including structured information, free format text,
         multimedia, and medical imagery.9

9 National Institute Standards and Technology (NIST), De-Identification of Personal Information, NISTIR 8053
(2025), https://www.nist.gov/publications/de-identification-personal-information

                                                                                                                    8
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                     Pg 9 of 23

          In a July 2026 publication by Gartner, a business and technology insights company,
 researchers predicted that “[p]rivacy risks are increasingly emerging from what AI algorithms infer
 about individuals rather than what data is directly exposed.”10 Gartner concluded that by 2029,
 most privacy incidents will result not from the direct exposure of personally identifiable
 information (PII), but from AI-generated inferences about individuals. This Gartner update on the
 AI privacy and cybersecurity risks follows a decade of scholarly research that illustrates how
 machine-driven cross-database linking exposes unique individual combinations and can lead to
 identifying a specific individual.11

          FBI Warns America’s airlines are under attack – AI exacerbates cybersecurity risks and
 facilitates the types of attacks that can undermine the deidentification of personal data. The
 aviation sector includes many industries ranging from airlines, airports, technology providers,
 subcontractors – all of which are prime targets for cyberattacks. The FBI has observed a shift in
 cyberattacks from isolated data theft to coordinated campaigns targeting the airline industry using
 social engineering techniques.12 In numerous breaches that exposed millions of passenger records,
 airlines suffered systemwide outages that grounded fleets and critical systems became unavailable,
 ransomware extortion demands were delivered, and client confidences undermined when stolen

 10 AI Privacy Risks Push CISOs Beyond Traditional Data Protection to Include Inference Governance, GARTNER
 (July 30, 2026), https://www.gartner.com/en/newsroom/press-releases/2026-07-30-gartner-predicts-most-privacy-
 incidents-will-stem-from-artificial-intelligence-generated-inferences-by-2029
 11 Anonymity, De-Identification, and the Accuracy of Data, HARVARDONLINE (Aug 28, 2023)
 https://harvardonline.harvard.edu/blog/anonymity-de-identification-accuracy-data
 12 Cybersecurity & Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), FBI, Canada, Australia and U.K. law enforcement, joint
 Cybersecurity Advisory, Scattered Spider, Alert Code AA23-320A (July 29, 2025), https://www.cisa.gov/news-
 events/cybersecurity-advisories/aa23-320a.

                                                                                                                     9
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 10 of 23

 sensitive passenger data and contact details were published on the dark web (an underground
 marketplace on a “dark” part of the Internet where cyber criminals post stolen data).13

          The threat landscape for reidentification of personal data is diverse and evolving. Inference,
 linkage, and reconstruction attacks are sophisticated data privacy exploits used to deanonymize
 data or reverse-engineer sensitive AI training models. While linkage attacks relying on external
 data remain a primary concern, inference and reconstruction attacks pose growing risks even to
 datasets processed with sophisticated methods.14 This necessitates robust privacy protections that
 anticipate a wide range of potential attack vectors.15

          The Debtors emphasize that notwithstanding the potential risks in the broader technology
 landscape, this sale is appropriate because it is grounded in the “reasonableness” standard in U.S.
 and state privacy laws and reflected in the Sale Agreement. Specifically, the Debtor intends to –

          (1) take reasonable measures to ensure that data cannot be associated with a natural person,
          (2) require a purchaser to publicly commit to maintaining and using deidentified data
 without attempting reidentification, and
          (3) prohibit a purchaser from onward transferring deidentified data to a third party unless
 the third party enters into a similar public commitment.

 13 A website that goes by the name “Information is Beautiful” provides a visualization of hundreds of the massive
 data breaches that have affected the private sector and government, World’s Biggest Data Breaches & Hacks (Sep.
 2025), https://informationisbeautiful.net/visualizations/worlds-biggest-data-breaches-hacks/.
 14 Data Privacy Attacks: The Alarming Risk of Reconstruction Attacks on Seemingly Anonymous Data, MEDIUM,
 (Jan. 12, 2024) https://medium.com/@oblv/data-privacy-attacks-the-alarming-risk-of-reconstruction-attacks-on-
 seemingly-anonymous-data-ddf68c3764d6.
 15 Jules Polonetsky, The Curse of Dimensionality: De-identification Challenges in the Sharing of Highly
 Dimensional Datasets, FUTURE OF PRIVACY FORUM (May 5, 2025), https://fpf.org/blog/the-curse-of-dimensionality-
 de-identification-challenges-in-the-sharing-of-highly-dimensional-datasets/.

                                                                                                                    10
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 11 of 23

   IV. Spirit Airlines Privacy Policy
       The Bankruptcy Code creates certain privacy protections for personal information that

 consumers provide to a company in connection with obtaining a product or service, primarily for
 personal, family, or household purposes – in this case, airline transportation. In enacting the
 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 (BAPCPA), Congress
 balanced the interest in the sale of assets of the bankruptcy estate with protection of consumer
 privacy by creating a duty to ensure that the promises made in the Debtors’ privacy policy are
 honored. 11 U.S.C. §363(b)(1)(B)(ii).

       Spirit Airlines published a privacy policy on its website to address the collection and
 handling of its consumer PII.16 It describes “how Spirit Airlines collects, uses, shares, and
 safeguards personal information.” It also tells consumers about their rights and choices with
 respect to their personal information, and how they can reach the company to get answers to
 questions.

       In the Sharing of Information section, the privacy policy specifies eight circumstances in
 which “we disclose information in the following situations.” Of particular relevance to this sale
 are the following provisions:

       1. Affiliates and Acquisitions. We may share information with any corporate affiliates
          (e.g ., parent company, sister companies, subsidiaries, joint ventures, or other companies
          under common control). If another company acquires, or plans to acquire, our company,
          business, or our assets, we will also share information with that company, including at the
          negotiation stage.

       7. Sale of Information. We do not sell personal information.

 16 The privacy policy was effective on December 22, 2022 and last updated on January 14, 2026 and was in effect on
 the filing date of this case.

                                                                                                                    11
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 12 of 23

       Debtors rely on Section 1, “Affiliates and Acquisitions,” to justify this sale. While the
 Debtors take the position that this sentence authorizes the transfer of all of its assets to the
 successful bidder, the meaning of the sentence is not entirely clear. This sentence does not address
 the sale of personal data or specify in any way what information is to be “shared.” When read in
 the context of “including the negotiation stage,” a reasonable interpretation of the sentence does
 not appear to authorize the sharing (or sale) of all the company’s personal data.

          The privacy policy describes in detail the specific purposes for the collection of PII and the
 uses Spirit makes of the personal data. All of these purposes and uses relate to providing airline
 travel for the Spirit customers and offering related services that may be of interest to them (i.e.,
 through targeted advertising and offerings). It does not suggest the sale of personal data for a
 different purpose other than airline travel.

          Sensitive personal data is a special subset of personal information that needs extra
 protection. If leaked or stolen, it can cause severe harm, fraud, or discrimination to the individuals
 who provided the information. The privacy policy contains a “Sensitive Information Disclosure”
 and states that the company collects the following sensitive information:

          • social security number
          • passport number, or other form of state or federal identification
          • account number
          • log-in information (to your Spirit account)
          • credit or debit card-related information
          • precise geolocation
          • biometric information (when consumer chooses to use self-serve bag drop kiosks)
 Sensitive data about children and teens who flew on Spirit Airlines is also included in the PII.

                                                                                                                    12
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 13 of 23

    V. Potential losses or gains of privacy and potential costs or benefits to consumers if the
          sale is approved.

 A. Potential Gains and Benefits to Consumers – Non-Personal Data / Deidentified Data
          An auction for this first sale of the digital assets was conducted on August 13, 2026. This

 category of assets, labeled “de-identified data,” consists of “certain deidentified enterprise data
 derived from the Company’s operations, including productivity and collaboration data, core
 business systems, and workflow and process data.”

          No one as yet has articulated a personal or cognizable benefit to consumers from this sale
 of their personal data. In a statement following announcement of the auction results, a Google
 spokesperson said the Spirit data “can be helpful in improving our products and AI models.”

          For the protection of the consumers who provided their personal data to Spirit for airline
 travel, this sale must minimize the risk that personal data, and particularly sensitive data, and
 inferences that AI might subsequently make, might be unlawfully accessed or disclosed.

          Excluded Databases – The deidentified data will not include, and is not being derived from,
 databases relating to customer insights, customer profiles, Free Spirit member data, savers club
 data, social media data, and survey data. No biometric or geolocation data will be included.
 B. Potential losses of privacy and costs to consumers if the sale is approved.

          The privacy policy does not contemplate the transfer of the personal consumer data or e-
 mails of Spirit consumers to a technology company for the development and/or training of AI
 models.

          In the “Sharing of Information” section, the Debtors’ privacy policy describes the
 categories of personal information Spirit collects, discloses for a business purpose, and shares with
 third parties. While the policy provides for the sharing of consumer personal data in some

                                                                                                                    13
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 14 of 23

 instances,17 in this sale the Debtors are seeking to sell significant amounts of deidentified personal
 data to a company for the purpose of training AI models.
 C. Possible alternatives that would mitigate potential privacy losses or costs to consumers.

          In a letter dated August 5, 2026, Debtors’ counsel advised the CPO that in the interest of
 protecting consumer privacy, Spirit Airlines intends to voluntarily apply “the deidentification
 standards enunciated by the modern state privacy laws and the FTC.” Specifically, it intends to –

          (1) take reasonable measures to ensure that data cannot be associated with a natural person,
          (2) require a purchaser to publicly commit to maintaining and using deidentified data
 without attempting reidentification, and
          (3) prohibit a purchaser from onward transferring deidentified data to a third party unless
 the third party enters into a similar public commitment.
          The Debtors and the successful bidder have voluntarily agreed to follow the up-to-date
 deidentification standard adopted in the California Consumer Privacy Act (“CCPA”) (Cal. Civ.
 Code § 1798.140(m)) for the deidentification process for this sale. The parties have made voluntary
 commitments on important issues related to the deidentification process; these are good first steps.
          For the protection of the consumers who provided their personal data to Spirit for airline
 travel, this sale must minimize the risk that personal data, and inferences that AI might
 subsequently make, could be unlawfully accessed or disclosed.
       To approve this sale, the CPO recommends that the Court adopt the proposed conditions to
 be provided as Attachment A to this CPO Report.

 17 For example, Paragraph 1 of the privacy policy authorizes sharing of “information” with entities that have a
 defined legal or contractual relationship with the Debtors. As such, the entities receive information subject to
 Spirit’s privacy policy and other contractual requirements. In the course of negotiations with prospective bidders in
 this case, Debtor has shared “information” – not personal data – in a “data room” as part of generally accepted
 business practices to inform prospective buyers of the categories of data available for sale.

                                                                                                                    14
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 15 of 23

   VI. Law
     A. Evolution of Laws Regarding Privacy and Deidentification of Personal Data
          This bankruptcy sale presents challenging issues in which law and technology are

 interrelated. It illustrates that with respect to the protection of personal data and deidentification,
 technology has far outpaced the law, potentially putting consumers at risk of significant harm if
 their deidentified personal data is reidentified and misused or stolen, or if AI makes inferences
 about individuals based on combining deidentified data with data from other sources, and that
 information is disclosed without authorization. While properly deidentified data has a very low
 risk of re-identification, combining it with external datasets or using insufficient deidentification
 methods can potentially reveal individual identities.

          There is no comprehensive data privacy law in America – privacy is regulated on an ad-
 hoc industry-by-industry basis. Several privacy laws and regulations currently in effect were
 enacted over a decade ago and they have not been updated to address the privacy risks presented
 by emerging technologies such as AI. None of these laws – or the definition of “deidentified data”
 – take into account the risks of reidentification that are growing as the power of AI increases.

          With respect to federal privacy regulation, while the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has
 been the primary federal agency providing guidance to the public and the business community on
 data privacy issues, the Federal Trade Commission Act (“FTCA”) excludes “air carriers” from the
 agency’s jurisdiction. 15 U.S.C. 45(a)(2). As an airline carrier, Spirit Airlines is covered by
 requirements promulgated by the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT). The DOT portal
 provides the following summary of the applicable privacy rules and requirements.18

 18 https://www.transportation.gov/individuals/aviation-consumer-protection/privacy
 See also, e.g., Airline Deregulation Act of 1978: Preemption of State Consumer Protection Laws, Congressional
 Research Service (March 1, 2023), https://www.congress.gov/crs-product/LSB10925.

                                                                                                                    15
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 16 of 23

          Air Consumer Privacy

          Airlines and ticket agents regularly collect personal information from passengers in the
          course of business that may not be otherwise publicly available such as name, date of birth,
          and frequent flyer number. It is important for this information to be collected and
          maintained responsibly.

          Mishandling the private information of consumers may be considered an unfair or
          deceptive practice. The U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) has the authority to
          investigate complaints and take action against airlines and ticket agents for unfair or
          deceptive practices. This authority includes imposing civil penalties where appropriate.

          It is an unfair or deceptive practice for an airline or ticket agent to violate the privacy of
          airline passengers by:

          • violating the terms of its privacy policy.
          • violating a rule issued by the DOT identifying specific privacy practices to be unfair

              or deceptive.
          • violating the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) or Federal Trade

              Commission (FTC) rules implementing COPPA.
          • failing, as a participant in the Data Privacy Framework (DPF) Program, to comply

              with DPF Principles.19
          • engaging in an “unfair” practice. In general, a practice is unfair if it causes or is likely

              to cause substantial injury, which is not reasonably avoidable, and the harm is not
              outweighed by benefits to consumers or competition.
          • engaging in a “deceptive” practice. A practice is deceptive if it is likely to mislead a
              consumer, acting reasonably under the circumstances, regarding a material matter. A
              matter is material if it is likely to have affected the consumer’s conduct or decision
              with respect to a product or service.

          In August 2022 the DOT issued guidance on these definitions in response to Executive

 Order 14036, Promoting Competition in the American Economy. In the guidance, the DOT

 explicitly explained that the definitions are modeled after the FTC’s authority.20

          The Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) addresses the need to protect

 children when they provide their personal data to a company covered by the statute. If an airline's

 19 The EU-U.S. Data Privacy Framework (DPF) is a method by which companies may transfer consumers’ personal
 data to the United States from the European Union (EU) without violating EU privacy laws.
 20 The FTC has adopted widely-accepted fair information practice principles and enforces laws prohibiting unfair
 and deceptive practices. The Consumer Financial Protection Board (CFPB) found that inadequate security for the
 sensitive consumer information collected, processed, maintained, or stored by a company can constitute an unfair
 practice in violation of 12 U.S.C. 5536(a)(1)(B).

                                                                                                                    16
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 17 of 23

 digital platform targets children under 13—or has actual knowledge it is collecting data from
 children under 13—it must get verifiable parental consent. While the COPPA rules do not apply
 to Spirit because the company collects personal data about children, not from children, nor do the
 rules apply to deidentified data, the statute focuses on children as a special category of individuals
 whose data require special protection.

          Again addressing the personal data of children – not deidentified data – the FTC updated
 COPPA (effective April 22, 2026) with a particular focus on the AI environment. The FTC ruled
 that disclosing or using a child's data to train or develop AI technologies is not integral to providing
 an online service. Companies must secure distinct, standalone, verifiable parental consent
 explicitly for AI model training or sharing data with third-party AI vendors. 21
 Ban on Indefinite Data Retention – AI systems rely heavily on massive historical datasets to
 optimize algorithms over time. The updated COPPA rule strictly prohibits the indefinite retention
 of children's personal information. Operators must establish and maintain a strict written data
 retention policy. Once data is no longer necessary for the specific, non-AI function it was originally
 collected for, it must be permanently deleted rather than archived to train future algorithms.

          Many children fly with family or friends or unaccompanied, and their personal data may
 be included in the assets to be sold. The risk of reidentification is particularly problematic when
 the deidentified data pertains to children. Consideration should be given to excluding the data of
 children from this sale.

 21 FTC Finalizes Changes to Children’s Privacy Rule Limiting Companies’ Ability to Monetize Kids’ Data:
 Agency's final rule expands protections for children's data and requires that operators provide more information to
 parents (Jan. 16, 2025), https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/news/press-releases/2025/01/ftc-finalizes-changes-
 childrens-privacy-rule-limiting-companies-ability-monetize-kids-data.

                                                                                                                    17
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 18 of 23

 Recent Congressional Action on Deidentification
          Legislators’ and regulators’ assessments about deidentification are changing and in

 connection with the “bulk data transfer rule” have concluded in the context of national security
 that deidentification standards may no longer be adequate to protect the rights of individuals. The
 Justice Department’s Data Security Program (DSP) is a regulatory framework that restricts or
 prohibits U.S. entities from transferring large quantities of sensitive personal data and U.S.
 government-related data to specific "countries of concern" or by classes of covered persons.22
 Unlike most privacy and data broker laws, in the context of national security, the DSP does not
 exclude anonymized, pseudonymized, or deidentified data but rather expressly includes the
 foregoing within the definition of certain covered data. 90 Fed Reg. 1636, 1650) (Jan 8, 2025).

          Pursuant to the rule-making process, the commentary to a proposed DSP regulation makes
 significant findings that seriously undercut reliance on traditional definitions of “deidentification”
 as a means to protect the privacy interests of consumers. 28 C.F.R. § 202.206, 90 Fed Reg. 1706
 (Jan. 8, 2025). The final rule, referencing the Notice of Proposed rulemaking, found that “advances
 in technology, combined with access by countries of concern to large datasets, increasingly enable
 countries of concern that access this data to re-identify or de-anonymize data,” allowing them to
 “reveal exploitable sensitive personal information on U.S. persons.” Id. at 1653.

          With respect to healthcare data, the Department reported that it agreed that the Health
 Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) de-identification standard no
 longer protects individuals, 90 Fed Reg 1636, 1666 (Jan. 8, 2026), and that human genomic data,

 22 U.S. Department of Justice, National Security Division, Data Security Program (eff. April 8, 2025),
 https://www.justice.gov/nsd/data-security. See Executive Order 14117, Preventing Access to Americans’ Bulk
 Sensitive Personal Data and United States Government Data by Countries of Concern, 89 Fed. Reg. 15421 (Feb. 28,
 2024). The program addresses the sale of bulk data to foreign countries. While the regulation does not specifically
 apply to this type of case, the factual findings regarding the failure of current deidentification tools/models are
 informative.

                                                                                                                    18
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 19 of 23

 even when deidentified, can still be reidentified. Id. at 1653. Finally, as the Justice Department
 has recently explained, “[o]pen-source reporting has repeatedly raised concern[s] that supposedly
 anonymized data is rarely, if ever, truly anonymous.” Notice of Proposed Rule Making, 89 Fed.
 Reg. 86116, 86126 (Oct. 29, 2024). The point is that many of the current deidentification tools are
 no longer a reliable means of protecting data, including the deidentified sensitive personal data.

     B. Limitations on Secondary Uses
 Passenger Name Record (PNR)

          Following the 9/11 attacks on the World Trade Center, Congress passed the Aviation and
 Transportation Security Act that established enhanced airline security screening measures. Pub.L.
 107-71 (Nov. 19, 2001). The law requires air carriers operating passenger flights in foreign air
 transportation to, from, or through the United States to make Passenger Name Record (PNR)
 information available to U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) upon request.23 Passengers
 are required to submit this information to the airline as a condition of boarding. Privacy protections
 for the government’s use and handling of PNR data are governed by the Privacy Act of 1974.

          Restrictions on the use and retention of PNR data have been mandated globally. Bilateral
 international agreements govern the international collection and transfer of PNR data. For
 example, the U.S.-EU PNR Agreement (2011) establishes privacy guardrails such as a strict
 purpose limitation that the data may only be used to prevent, detect, investigate, and prosecute
 terrorist offenses and transnational crimes. It cannot be repurposed for general surveillance.

          In 2022 the EU Court of Justice imposed strict new boundaries for PNR data retention at
 six months for general travelers unless there is objective evidence linking a specific passenger to

 23 49 U.S.C. § 44909(c)(3) requires airlines to provide the government with the full name of each passenger and
 crew member, date of birth and citizenship, sex, passport number and country of issuance, U.S. visa or resident alien
 number, and other information.

                                                                                                                    19
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 20 of 23

 a genuine, present, or foreseeable threat of terrorism or serious transnational crime. The U.S.
 framework relies on keeping data active for five years (and dormant for up to 15 years). The Court
 also created a ban on general predictive modeling, ruling that law enforcement cannot store
 historical PNR data indefinitely just to "feed" or train machine-learning algorithms and predictive
 databases. Security agencies are prohibited from keeping records just to look for future,
 unconfirmed patterns. Ligue des droits humains v. Conseil des ministres, Case C-817/19,
 ECLI:EU:C:2022:491 (21 June 2022).

          The strict purpose limitation that the PNR data may only be used to prevent, detect,
 investigate, and prosecute terrorist offenses and transnational crimes suggests that it may not be
 appropriate to retain and use PNR data that was provided by Spirit passengers as a condition of
 boarding airline flights for a different purpose, namely, to train AI models.

     C. Deidentification Framework
          It is the Debtors’ position that “modern privacy laws” do not apply to data that has been

 deidentified. In a memorandum to the CPO dated August 16, 2026, Debtors’ counsel points to a
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC) report titled “Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid
 Change: Recommendations For Businesses and Policymakers,” that “articulate[d] best practice[s]
 for companies that collect and use consumer data.” 24 Among other things, the FTC discussed what
 data should be, and should not be, considered personal data. This deidentification standard has
 been uniformly adopted by the 26 states that have enacted modern privacy legislation.25 Those

 24 See FTC, Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change: Recommendations for Business and
 Policymakers (March 2012) at 21.
 25 Many of the modern State privacy laws provide that any information “collected, processed, sold, or disclosed in
 relation to price, route, or service” by an airline are further exempted from any state laws limiting the sale of such
 data. See, e.g., Fla. Stat. § 501.704 (2025). While some State laws do not contain such an express carve-out, any
 prohibition contained within those states’ laws concerning the sale of data would arguably be preempted by the
 Airline Deregulation Act. See 49 U.S.C. § 41713.

                                                                                                                    20
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 21 of 23

 laws universally codified the FTC’s “reasonable linkability” standard for determining when data

 has been deidentified.

          Thus, the Debtors propose to follow the codified definition of deidentification adopted

 within the California Consumer Privacy Act (“CCPA”) for the deidentification process for this

 sale:

          (m) “Deidentified” means information that cannot reasonably be used to infer
          information about, or otherwise be linked to, a particular consumer provided that the
          business that possesses the information:

               (1) Takes reasonable measures to ensure that the information cannot be associated
               with a consumer or household.
               (2) Publicly commits to maintain and use the information in deidentified form and
               not to attempt to reidentify the information, except that the business may attempt to
               reidentify the information solely for the purpose of determining whether its
               deidentification processes satisfy the requirements of this subdivision.
               (3) Contractually obligates any recipients of the information to comply with all
               provisions of this subdivision.
          . . .
          (v)(3) “Personal information” does not include consumer information that is
          deidentified…”
          The Successful Bid expressly incorporates the three requirements set forth under that

 standard for deidentification, and will require an independent third party to conduct the

 deidentification based upon industry standards and practice.

          The Debtors believe that by following this “reasonableness” standard in the U.S. and state

 privacy laws, they meet the legal requirements for this sale. The process for deidentification the

 Debtors have adopted is thoughtful and designed to meet the latest professional standards

 available. The Debtors are in the process of identifying a vendor to conduct the data

 deidentification. The CPO requests an opportunity to learn more about the standards the vendor

 plans to follow once the vendor is selected.

                                                                                                                    21
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 22 of 23

          Because organizations can technically comply with statutory deidentification standards,
 harmed individuals have little legal recourse or avenue for recovery when reidentification occurs.
 There is no duty for a company to report to a federal or state regulator or affected individual if
 deidentified personal data has been reidentified. There is no external way to verify if a private
 entity has privately deidentified “anonymized” data. Thus individuals whose personal data has
 been deidentified are at a serious disadvantage because of this lack of transparency.

          The Sale Agreement requires the successful bidder publicly to commit to maintaining and
 using deidentified data without attempting reidentification. This prong of the “reasonableness”
 standard that requires such a public statement is intended to provide a means of redress for any
 consumer whose data was reidentified by the successful bidder.

          Further, the successful bidder must provide reasonable and appropriate security for the
 deidentified personal data it receives. The DOT has found that mishandling the private information
 of consumers may be considered an unfair or deceptive practice. Google published the following
 paper titled Our Approach to Protecting AI Training Data that outlines it approach to cybersecurity
 for AI training data.
 Best Practices for Protecting AI Training Data

          Google has published Our Approach to Protecting AI Training Data that highlights best
 practices in data protection and describes how Google applies them in its systems.26

          Protecting data requires both technical controls to enable safe data use at scale, and
          governance processes to ensure that companies have visibility and control over how their
          data is used. This fundamentally requires: understanding data and ensuring it has sufficient
          metadata in the form of attributes, controlling the data and implementing policies to allow
          (or disallow) certain usage based on those attributes, transforming data to enable its usage
          in policy compliant ways, and human oversight and governance.

 26 Our Approach to Protecting AI Training Data, GOOGLE, https://research.google/pubs/our-approach-to-protecting-
 ai-training-data/

                                                                                                                    22
25-11897-shl Doc 1581 Filed 09/08/26 Entered 09/08/26 20:15:24 Main Document
                                                    Pg 23 of 23

          Protecting data in AI inherits these requirements and introduces new requirements to
          account for unique AI-specific risks including memorization/recitation and the costs of
          training foundational models. Meeting these new risks requires new capabilities including
          enhanced understanding of data and model lineage as well as an increased ability to control
          data usage through checks on data for policy compliance at the time a training job is
          configured before it is run.
          This white paper offers an in-depth look at data protection best practices and Google’s data
          protection capabilities, and is one of a series of publications about Google's Secure AI
          Framework (SAIF).
 Conclusion
          The issues related to the sale of the deidentified data of the more than 97 million Spirit
 passengers required under sections 332 and 363 of the Bankruptcy Code have been addressed for
 consideration by the Court, including compliance with the privacy policy, the application of non-
 bankruptcy laws, and the losses or gains, and costs or benefits to consumers, if the sale is approved.
          The CPO has provided an analysis of the laws and privacy principles relevant to the
 proposed sale, and preliminary recommendations regarding practical steps the parties can take to
 protect the privacy of the Spirit consumers. The CPO believes the Recommendations in this CPO
 Report strike an appropriate balance between the privacy rights of consumers and practical
 considerations associated with this bankruptcy sale. She stands ready to provide whatever further
 analysis or recommendations the Court deems appropriate.

                                                                         Respectfully submitted,
                                                                         Lucy L. Thomson
                                                                         Consumer Privacy Ombudsman

                                                                                                                    23
