                     NAVIER–STOKES LOST IN TRANSLATION
                                     –
     WHY LEAN VERIFICATION OF AI AUTOFORMALISATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE
                     CORRECT NATURAL LANGUAGE PROOFS


                                        A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*



          A BSTRACT. Autoformalisation is increasingly used to verify mathematical texts, including those generated by AI,
          as in OpenAIs announced proof of blow-up of solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations. In this process, an AI
          system translates the text from a natural language (NL) into a formal language such as Lean. Once this translation
          is done, the argument expressed in the formal language can easily be mechanically verified. The purpose of this
          article is to demonstrate why this process may offer no confidence in the original NL argument, owing to the vari-
          ous difficulties in performing the translation semantically faithfully. In particular, we highlight that the problem of
          resolving ambiguities in mathematical NL text, which is necessary in order to provide semantically faithful trans-
          lation, is arbitrarily high up in the Solvability Complexity Index (SCI) hierarchy/arithmetical hierarchy (the SCI
          = ∞). Hence, informally, providing semantically faithful AI autoformalisation is harder than any computational
          problem including the Halting problem (which has SCI = 1). To demonstrate the effect of this result we provide
          several examples of AI mistranslations of NL statements and proofs into Lean in practice, resulting in mismatches
          between NL proofs and their Lean ‘verifications’. These include OpenAI’s announced Navier-Stokes proof. In
          particular, we show that the formalised Lean proof does not correspond to the NL proof of blow-up of solutions to
          the Navier-Stokes equations.


                             1. I NTRODUCTION : T WO TYPES OF AUTOFORMALISATION

   We start by describing the two main types of autoformalisation from a natural language (NL) to a formal
language:
(i) Translating an alleged proof in an NL to obtain a formal Lean proof. Suppose a theorem (the state-
    ment, not including a proof) has already been faithfully and correctly translated into Lean. Suppose also
    the theorem is accompanied by an alleged NL proof. The goal is to let a machine (which we will call AI)
    translate the NL proof into Lean to obtain a formal proof of the theorem. Success is declared when the
    AI has produced a ‘translation’ which Lean accepts as a valid proof (meaning it compiles), with no use of
    Lean’s ‘sorry’ keyword or extra axioms being permitted.
(ii) Faithful semantic translation of a mathematical text. Suppose we are given a mathematical text (e.g. a
     book or a paper) written in an NL. The goal is to let an AI translate every definition, theorem, proposition,
     proof etc. in the text to Lean code that compiles, see e.g. the example in §5.1. The definitions, statements
     and proofs must themselves be translated, semantically preserving the source’s mathematical content. For
     a book, this obligation applies throughout and includes the dependencies between concepts and results. If
     the stated goal is to validate its proofs, correspondence to the written arguments must also be established.
     In particular, a different, provable assertion would not constitute a semantically faithful translation. This
     autoformalisation problem is much harder than problem (i) above (see §4).
Warning: Meeting the success criterion of (i) does not mean that the original NL proof is correct. Indeed, a
full Lean compilation of the ‘translation’ does not guarantee a semantically faithful translation. The AI could
very easily change the semantics of the translation in order to satisfy this success criterion. For example, the

   2020 Mathematics Subject Classification. 35Q30, 03Dxx (primary) and 68V20, 68Txx, 03B65 (secondary).
   Key words and phrases. AI Autoformalisation, Navier-Stokes equations, Solvability Complexity Index hierarchy, boundaries of AI,
Hilbert’s 10th problem.
   *Corresponding author: a.hansen@damtp.cam.ac.uk.
                                                                    1
2                                  A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*




         F IGURE 1. ChatGPT-6 (Astra Ultra) ‘translates’ the wrong NL ‘proof’ in Example 2.1 into
         a correct proof in Lean that correctly compiles.

NL proof could be wrong while the ‘translated’ proof is correct (see Example 2.1). Another possibility is
that both the NL proof and the formal proof are correct, but completely different (see Example 2.2). A third
possibility is that the NL proof provides stronger statements than what the formal proof actually establishes,
with (of course) different proofs. The latter happens in OpenAI’s announced proof of blow-up of Navier-
Stokes equations. In all cases the correctness of the formal proof does not say anything about the correctness
of the NL proof.
    To answer the question: ‘Is the NL argument correct?’ one needs to consider the second form of autoform-
alisation (ii). This is, however, in general an extremely difficult problem, as we discuss in §4. In fact, it is
strictly harder than the Halting problem.
    Because of the phenomenon of mistranslations – as highlighted in this paper – the NL proof by OpenAI and
other autoformalised Lean proofs should not prima facie be trusted without the same peer review process and
scrutiny that other proofs are subjected to. The Lean code merely tells us that the theorem is correct, yet the
NL proof with intermediate arguments, lemmas and results may be incorrect or have incorrect arguments.
    Disclaimer: We do not make claims about the correctness of OpenAI’s NL proof, we only make statements
about mistranslations into Lean.

         2. W HEN AN AI AUTOFORMALISED ‘ TRANSLATION ’ IS NOT SEMANTICALLY FAITHFUL

   In order to illustrate the issues with the first type of autoformalisation described in §1 we consider sev-
eral examples of mistranslation. We begin with some elementary examples to highlight the issue, and then
turn to more technical examples of mistranslation in OpenAI’s announced proof of blow-up of Navier-Stokes
equations in §3.

Example 2.1 (A correct statement with an incorrect NL proof, and a ‘translation’ to a different, correct Lean
proof). Consider the following theorem:
                   Let p(x) = x3 − x2 − x + 1, where x ∈ R. Then p(x) ⩾ 0 for x ⩾ −1.
                      WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                     3




          F IGURE 2. ChatGPT-6 (Astra Ultra) ‘translates’ the correct NL proof in Example 2.2 into a
          completely different proof in Lean that compiles.


Incorrect NL proof. The roots are −1, of multiplicity two, and 1, of multiplicity one. Hence1,

                                                 p(x) = (x − 1)(x + 1)2 ⩾ 0,

since both factors are nonnegative on the stated domain.                                                       □

The above proof is incorrect; the multiplicities of the stated roots are wrong and hence the claimed factorisation
of p(x) is wrong too. In the exchange shown in Figure 1, a user presented the incorrect NL argument above
as their ‘proof’ and asked the chatbot to write this argument as a Lean proof, providing a Lean code that
compiles. The chatbot returned a correct Lean proof by finding the correct multiplicities of the roots. This
example demonstrates how the first form of autoformalisation above can result in a wrong NL proof being
mistranslated into a correct Lean proof.


Example 2.2 (A correct statement with a correct NL proof, which is ‘translated’ into a Lean proof with a
different mathematical argument ). Consider the following theorem:

                         Let A = (aij ) be a real symmetric n × n matrix. Then tr(A2 ) ⩾ 0.


   1Note that the ‘hence’ is also dubious without mentioning the leading coefficient of p.
4                                   A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


Correct NL proof. Diagonalise A in an orthonormal eigenbasis. Since tr(A2 ) is invariant under a change of
basis, we may assume A = diag(λ1 , . . . , λn ). Now compute
                                                  X           X
                                    tr(A2 ) =       (A2 )ii =   aij aji .                            (2.1)
                                                   i                     i,j
                                                              2
                                                       P
As aij = 0 for i ̸= j and aii = λi , this reduces to       i λi ⩾ 0.                                          □

   In the exchange shown in Figure 2, a user presented the correct NL argument above as their proof and asked
the chatbot to write this argument as a Lean proof which compiles. The chatbot, however, returned a different
proof displayed in Figure 2. The code gives a correct Lean proof, which has a distinctly different argument
compared to the original NL proof that the chatbot was asked to write up in Lean. Indeed, the Lean proof starts
directly at (2.1), keeping the original matrix A: it then uses aji = aij to conclude that
                                            X             X
                                                aij aji =      a2ij ⩾ 0.
                                            i,j               i,j

The unfaithful translation of the argument simply omits the change of basis and then proceeds in the same
manner as the NL proof (using symmetry rather than diagonality to obtain a sum of squares). Both proofs are
correct, yet this example demonstrates how the first form of autoformalisation above can mistranslate a correct
NL proof to yield a completely different valid Lean proof.

         3. M ISTRANSLATION IN PRACTICE – O PENAI’ S ANNOUNCED NAVIER -S TOKES PROOF

   The three-dimensional incompressible Navier-Stokes regularity problem has a long history [11, 18, 18, 24,
29, 42, 47, 48, 55] (we can only cite a small subset of papers here), dating back to Leray’s fundamental paper
from 1934 [33], and was designated a Clay Millennium Prize Problem in 2000 [23]. In the GitHub repository
accompanying its recently announced proof of finite-time blow-up of solutions to the Navier-Stokes equations,
OpenAI writes:
         ‘This repository contains Lean 4 formalizations of the results presented in “Finite time
        blowup for Navier–Stokes” [their announced NL proof] and “Finite time blowup for the Euler
        equation” by OpenAI.’
It is natural to ask whether this formalisation in Lean represents a semantically faithful translation of the NL
paper, so that we can conclude that the NL paper represents a correct proof? Interestingly, OpenAI’s announced
proof becomes a great source for examples of mistranslations, exactly as pointed out in §2. In particular, the
Lean formalisation does not represent a semantically faithful translation of the NL paper, meaning that the
Lean formalisation provides no guarantee that the NL proof is correct. We provide examples below and a
more comprehensive list in Appendix §B.

3.1. When the NL paper declares stronger statements than what Lean proves. We commence with an
example that complements those in §2. In the following example the AI autoformalisation results in a different
Lean proof of a weaker statement.

Example 3.1 (The NL paper claims a stronger inverse estimate than the cited Lean formalisation). Figure 3
concerns the estimate in Lemma 8.6, equation (8.19), of OpenAI’s Finite time blowup for Navier–Stokes. We
compare this estimate with the cited Lean declarations at commit f9e8bc5 (click to see the documentation
on Github). The issue is a change in the order of the input derivatives required to bound the output derivatives.
In particular, we have the following discrepancy. With m a nonnegative integer, the comparison in Figure 3 is

                        NL paper, equation (8.19):           ∥N −1 F ∥Cym ⩽ Cm ∥F ∥Cym+4 ,                  (3.1)
                                                                    −1
                                    Lean Estimate:           ∥N          F ∥Cym ⩽ Km ∥F ∥Cym+5 .            (3.2)

Summary: The Lean code produced by OpenAI often has stronger conditions on bounds on the derivatives of
various functions than the corresponding results in the NL paper.
         WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                5




F IGURE 3. ChatGPT-6 (Astra Ultra) shares our concern that the NL argument in Lemma 8.6
in the announced proof of blow-up of Navier–Stokes has not been faithfully translated into
Lean. In particular, there is a discrepancy between Lemma 8.6 and the cited Lean estimate:
the latter uses one additional input derivative to control the same torus derivatives of the
output. See Example 3.1 for details.
6                                            A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


   Above, F : P × T2 → C is a function of parameters in P and a torus variable y ∈ T2 , with T2 := R2 /Z2 .
The non-negative constants Cm , Km are independent of F but allowed to depend on m and the fixed direction
vt (which defines an operator N = vt · ∇y ). Note the above norms only involve torus derivatives. See §3.1.1
for further explanation of the notation.
    The proof of Lemma 8.6 opens with the following passage (source paper, page 96):
           “The divisor bound (6.7) gives |vt · k|−1 ⩽ C(1 + |k|). Four more derivatives of F than the
           requested output leave a summable (1+|k|)−3 bound on the Fourier series in two dimensions.
           This proves (8.19), smoothness, and uniqueness after fixing the zero Fourier coefficient. The
           multiplier commutes with every slow coefficient derivative and preserves reality.”
The related Lean codes – on the other hand – all use five additional derivatives, not four. A key example is the
following Lean theorem, which appears to bear the closest resemblance to (8.19):

    omit [FiniteDimensional R P] in
    theorem norm_derivativeWord_inverse_le (d : Direction) {f : Source P}
         (hf : ContDiff R ∞ f) (hp : Periodic f) (w : List Bool) (p : P) (Y : Plane) {C : R}
         (hzero : ∀ x ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1, ∀ y ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1, ∥ f (p, (x, y))∥ ⩽ C)
         (hfirst : ∀ x ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1, ∀ y ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1,
           ∥ SmoothFourierData.xJet (w.length + 5) (slice f p) (x, y)∥ ⩽ C)
         (hsecond : ∀ x ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1, ∀ y ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1,
           ∥ SmoothFourierData.xJet (w.length + 5)
               (SmoothFourierData.swapFunction (slice f p)) (x, y)∥ ⩽ C) :
         ∥ derivativeWord w (slice (inverse d f) p) Y∥ ⩽
            ParametricTorusInverse.mixedLossConstant w.length * C := by
        have hbound := SmoothFourierData.coefficient_seminorm_bound (slice_smooth hf p) (hp p)
         (w.length + 1) hzero (by simpa only [Nat.add_assoc] using hfirst)
         (by simpa only [Nat.add_assoc] using hsecond)
        calc
         _ ⩽ ((6 * ∥ omega−1∥ ) * ∥ omega∥ ˆ w.length) *
               coeffSeminorm (w.length + 1) (coefficient f p) :=
           inverse_derivativeWord_bound d
               (SmoothFourierData.rapid_coefficient (slice_smooth hf p) (hp p)) w Y
         _ ⩽ ((6 * ∥ omega−1∥ ) * ∥ omega∥ ˆ w.length) *
                                                  P′
             ((3 ˆ ((w.length + 1) + 4) * C) *       k : Frequency, (weight k ˆ 4)−1) :=
           mul_le_mul_of_nonneg_left hbound (by positivity)
         _ = _ := by simp only [ParametricTorusInverse.mixedLossConstant, Nat.add_assoc]; ring


Source (GitHub permalinks): openai/NavierStokesAndEuler, commit f9e8bc5.
File: NavierStokes/SmoothFamilyTorusInverse.lean.
Declaration: norm derivativeWord inverse le, lines 1059–1080.
Red has been added to highlight aspects relevant to this example. The displayed Lean code is otherwise unchanged.
   The most important aspects of the above Lean theorem norm_derivativeWord_inverse_le are
the two hypotheses:

         (hfirst : ∀ x ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1, ∀ y ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1,
           ∥ SmoothFourierData.xJet (w.length + 5) (slice f p) (x, y)∥ ⩽ C)
         (hsecond : ∀ x ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1, ∀ y ∈ Icc (0 : R) 1,
           ∥ SmoothFourierData.xJet (w.length + 5)
               (SmoothFourierData.swapFunction (slice f p)) (x, y)∥ ⩽ C)



which 2 should be interpreted as
                                        ∂ m+5 F (y1 , y2 )                ∂ m+5 F (y1 , y2 )
                                                           ⩽ C,                              ⩽ C,
                                            ∂y1m+5                            ∂y2m+5
    2
     The parameter set P are the spatial variables which are not relevant to this part of the proof.
                      WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                                            7


for every y = (y1 , y2 ) ∈ T2 , and the conclusion

        ∥ derivativeWord w (slice (inverse d f) p) Y∥ ⩽
          ParametricTorusInverse.mixedLossConstant w.length * C



which3 should be interpreted as
                                       ∂ |w| N −1 F (y1 , y2 )
                                                               ⩽ K|w| · C,
                                                ∂w
with C the same constant as in the hypotheses, and where w is a multi-index. Technically, to obtain an estimate
directly comparable with equation (8.19) in OpenAI’s NL paper, one would need also to take a supremum over
all such all multi-indices w with |w| ⩽ m 4, thereby obtaining

                                                  N −1 F C m ⩽ K̂m ∥F ∥Cym+5 ,
                                                              y


with K̂m = max(K0 , K1 , . . . , Km ). This estimate is then strictly weaker than equation (8.19) due to the extra
derivative on the right-hand side.

Remark 3.2 (Consistent mismatch between m + 4 and m + 5 derivatives). Similar estimates as (3.2) can be
seen throughout OpenAI’s Lean code: for example,

                            inverse_finiteJets and mixedJet_inverse_bound

each contain a similar m + 5 derivative requirement, rather than the expected m + 4 derivatives from the NL
paper, as in (3.1).

   The reason for the above discrepancy is related to the difference in proof method employed by the NL
paper and the Lean code. As the quote above indicates, the NL paper makes use of the convergent series
          1
P
  k∈Z2 (1+|k|)3 by using m + 4 derivatives. In contrast, the Lean code displayed above for

                                        norm_derivativeWord_inverse_le                                                             (3.3)
                                   1
                        P
employs the series k∈Z2 (1+|k1 |+|k    2 |)
                                           4 (see the exponent ‘4’ highlighted in red in the code (3.3) above) and

thus uses m + 5 derivatives instead. Tracing the proof of (3.3) we find that the series arises from applying
the Lean theorem coefficient_seminorm_bound, just as Figure 3 mentions. Consequently, the Lean
results discussed in this section are weaker 5 than (3.1) in the NL proof.

3.1.1. Explanation of the notation and technical information. The variable y = (y1 , y2 ) belongs to a two-
dimensional torus T2 = R2 /Z2 . The fixed vector and differential operator in Lemma 8.6 are
                               √                                 √
                         vt = ( 2 − 1, 1),     N = vt · ∂y = ( 2 − 1)∂y1 + ∂y2 .

The subscript t is specified in equation (6.2) of the source paper. Here F : T2 → C is smooth, with zero
                           ´
normalized Haar mean: [0,1]2 F (y) dy = 0. The notation N −1 F denotes the unique smooth zero-mean
solution φ of N φ = F . The zero-mean requirement assures this solution is uniquely specified (else any
solution, via addition of a constant, yields another). For smooth G : T2 → C and a nonnegative integer r, the
following norm is defined:

                                    ∥G∥Cyr := max sup |∂ya1 ∂yb2 G(y)|,                  a, b ∈ N.
                                                  a,b⩾0 y∈T2
                                                  a+b⩽r

    3
     Strictly speaking, w in OpenAI’s Lean code is defined to be an object in the derivativeWord class: a list of booleans for which each
‘false’ entry corresponds to a derivative in the y1 coordinate and each ‘true’ entry a derivative in the y2 coordinate.
    4This is not explicitly done as part of norm derivativeWord inverse le.
    5In fact, some such Lean results are actually incomparable with (3.1), due to the mismatch in the type of derivative. For example, the

Lean theorem inverse finiteJets uses mixed derivatives, not just torus derivatives. Note however that these results are still using
m + 5 derivatives.
8                                             A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


The subscript y means that other variables are held fixed. This is relevant in the case G is of the form G(y) =
F (p, y) for some F : P × T2 → C and some fixed p.

3.2. When a statement and its proof in the NL paper are both mistranslated into Lean. We now give an
example that goes further than Example 2.2 in §2. In the following example the AI autoformalisation results
in a Lean proof of a different bound obtained by a substantively different mathematical argument.

Example 3.3 (The NL paper’s pressure-flux bound and its proof are both mistranslated). Figure 4 concerns
the estimate in equation (10.19) of OpenAI’s Finite time blowup for Navier–Stokes. We compare this estimate,
together with its proof, with the cited Lean declaration at commit f9e8bc5. The issue here is not only a
change in the bound, but also a change in the mathematical argument used to establish it. In particular, we
have the following discrepancy: with R ⩾ 1, the comparison in Figure 4 is
                          ˆ
                                           CT h              1/2           3/4
                                                                               i
  NL, equation (10.19):      π w · ∇χR ⩽        (BR + 1)BR + R−3/4 BR , for a.e. t ∈ (0, T ),          (3.4)
                                            R
                          ˆ                                 A
                                              h
                                                   1/2          R    1             3/4
                                                                                        i
          Lean estimate:     π w · ∇χR ⩽ CT (BR + 1)              + 2 + R−7/4 BR , ∀t ∈ (0, T ), (3.5)
                                                               R    R
where both the left hand side and the right hand side of both (3.4) and (3.5) depend on t; see below for
explanation of the notation. The NL paper’s bound is stated purely in terms of BR , whereas the Lean estimate
additionally depends on AR . Here CT is a finite nonnegative constant, allowed to depend on T (which itself
is the maximum timescale for which the bounds are considered) and the norm conventions, but not on R.
Although equation (10.17) in the NL paper bounds BR above using AR , it cannot be used to eliminate AR
from the Lean estimate to recover (10.19); the two bounds in (3.4) and (3.5) are therefore hard to compare. 6
    The closest Lean code to (10.19) (equation (3.4) in our paper) is the following result:

    theorem exists_uniform_actual_pressure_flux_bound {T : R} {u v : VelocityField}
        {p q : PressureField} (H : PressureRecovery.Hypotheses T u v p q)
        (M0 U0 G0 : R (hM0 : 0 ⩽ M0 ) (hU0 : 0 ⩽ U0 ) (hG0 : 0 ⩽ G0 )
        (hM : ∀ t ∈ Icc 0 T, MemLp (fun x => (u - v) (t, x)) 2 volume ∧
          comparisonLpNorm 2 (fun x => (u - v) (t, x)) ⩽ M0 )
        (hU : ∀ t ∈ Icc 0 T, MemLp (fun x => u (t, x)) 3 volume ∧
          comparisonLpNorm 3 (fun x => u (t, x)) ⩽ U0 )
        (hG : ∀ t ∈ Icc 0 T, ∀ i j : Fin 3,
          Integrable (tensorDiff u v t i j) volume ∧ comparisonLpNorm 1 (tensorDiff u v t i j) ⩽ G0 ) :
        ∃ CP : R, 0 ⩽ CP ∧ ∀ R : R, 1 ⩽ R →∀ t ∈ Ioo 0 T,
           ´
          | x, (p - q) (t, x) * fderiv R (ComparisonCutoffs.weight R) x ((u - v) (t, x))| ⩽ CP *
             ((cutoffL6 (ComparisonCutoffs.cutoff R) (u - v) t ˆ (1 / 2 : R) + 1) *
               (dissipationRoot (ComparisonCutoffs.cutoff R) (u - v) t / R + 1 / R ˆ 2) +
               R ˆ (-(7 / 4 : R)) * cutoffL6 (ComparisonCutoffs.cutoff R) (u - v) t ˆ (3 / 4 : R)) := by
    obtain ⟨CP, hCP, hbound⟩ := exists_uniform_canonicalCutoffFlux_bound M0 U0 G0 hM0 hU0 hG0
    refine ⟨CP, hCP, ?_⟩
    intro R hR t ht
    have ht’ : t ∈ Icc 0 T := Ioo_subset_Icc_self ht
    have hu := NavierStokes.PeriodicUniqueness.spatial_smooth H.smooth_u ht’
    have hv := NavierStokes.PeriodicUniqueness.spatial_smooth H.smooth_v ht’
    exact(actual_flux_integrable_and_le_canonicalNorm H ht (zero_lt_one.trans_le hR) hu hv).2.trans
      (hbound R hR u v t hu hv (hM t ht’).1 (hU t ht’).1 (fun i j => (hG t ht’ i j).1)
        (hM t ht’).2 (hU t ht’).2 (fun i j => (hG t ht’ i j).2))


Source (GitHub permalinks): openai/NavierStokesAndEuler, commit f9e8bc5.
File: NavierStokes/R3/PressureFlux.lean.
Declaration: exists uniform actual pressure flux bound, line 576.

     Note that similar bounds (which are nonetheless distinct from (3.5)) appear in

                                  exists uniform canonicalCutoffFlux bound
     6In fact, the purpose of the lemma is to establish that w = 0 and hence the (equal to 0) bound on the right hand side of (3.4) is stricter

than the (non-zero) bound on the right hand side of (3.5). However, this is only established after completing the entire proof of Lemma
10.5.
         WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                  9




F IGURE 4. ChatGPT-6 (Astra Ultra) shares our concern that the proof of the pressure-flux
bound (10.19) in the announced proof of blow-up of Navier–Stokes is not semantically faith-
fully translated into Lean. Both the stated bound and the mathematical argument used to
prove it differ from the cited Lean estimate. Example 3.3 explains this in further detail, in-
cluding the notation.
10                                         A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


and canonicalCutoffFlux bound7. The bound (3.5) is given in the following Lean code, taken from
that of exists uniform actual pressure flux bound, Line 576.

              ´
          |        x, (p - q) (t, x) * fderiv R (ComparisonCutoffs.weight R) x ((u - v) (t, x))| ⩽ CP *
                  ((cutoffL6 (ComparisonCutoffs.cutoff R) (u - v) t ˆ (1 / 2 : R) + 1) *
                    (dissipationRoot (ComparisonCutoffs.cutoff R) (u - v) t / R + 1 / R ˆ 2) +
                    R ˆ (-(7 / 4 : R)) * cutoffL6 (ComparisonCutoffs.cutoff R) (u - v) t ˆ (3 / 4 : R))



   The discrepancy in (3.5) above arises through the diverging proof methods employed by the NL paper and
the Lean code. It is beyond the scope, and besides the point, of this article to go into the full technical details
of the proof technique for the NL paper’s estimate (10.19) (in this paper, (3.4)). More information is provided
below, but in summary three of the main reasons for the differences between the results and strategy used by
the NL paper and the Lean argument are as follows:
     (1) The Lean proof does not rely on the boundedness of the Riesz transform as a map from L3/2 → L3/2 ;
         it instead invokes Sobolev embedding to move to L2 and uses the boundedness of the Riesz transform
         in L2 . The additional derivative involved in the Sobolev embedding is why (3.5) features AR .
     (2) The Lean proof applies Hölder’s inequality with different exponents, which changes the bounds at the
         end.
     (3) In the Lean proof, the left hand integral in (3.4) is explicitly shown to be continuous in time. This
         ensures that the statement for almost every t ∈ (0, T ) can be upgraded to a statement that avoids the
         ‘almost every’ qualifier.

3.2.1. Explanation of the notation and technical information. For context, inequality (10.19) appears itself in
the proof of a velocity uniqueness result, namely Lemma 10.5. In the proof of Lemma 10.5, using the language
of the NL paper, one chooses 0 ⩽ φ ⩽ 1 to be smooth, compactly supported and equal to one on the unit ball.
For R ⩾ 1, they write φR (x) = φ(x/R) and χR = φ8R . Continuing, the NL paper states: ‘Let Ri be the Riesz
transform with Fourier multiplier operator iξi /∥ξ∥2 .’ The NL proof of Lemma 10.5 begins by assuming that
(v, P ) and (u, p) are two solutions – with v (respectively u) the velocity and P (respectively p) the pressure
– to a constructed Navier Stokes problem. The NL proof defines w := v − u and π := P − p and proceeds
to establish the vanishing of w8; the estimate (10.19) is a stepping stone towards this result. Note that v, u, w
all depend on a time parameter t as well as spatial parameters; the time parameter is suppressed throughout
                                                                         P
the remaining discussion. The proof also defines a distribution π∗ = i,j Ri Rj gij where Ri , Rj are Riesz
transforms, and where g = (gij )i,j∈{1,2,3} with gij = vi vj − ui uj = wi wj + wi uj + ui wj . As indicated in
Figure 4, using the NL paper’s notation,
                                      ˆ             1/2
                              AR :=         χR |∇w|2      ,     BR := ∥φ4R w∥L6 ,

so that AR is a localized L2 gradient norm and BR a localized L6 velocity norm.
   The purpose of defining π∗ is that it is an attempt to get an explicit approximation for π in terms of the
velocity fields; hence instead of directly analysing the integrand in (10.19), one replaces π in this term by π∗ 9.
The integrand is then factored into a product of two terms: φ4R π∗ and another test function containing φ3R .
The Lean proof differs here, in that it splits the integral into φ2R π∗ and another test function containing φ5R ; we
shall see the consequences of this change later.

    7In addition, there is a similar argument that appears in the file NavierStokes/R3StressPressureEstimate.lean as

part of the definition of regularized flux Bound. Once again the bound established there is different from the one in (3.4), and,
intriguingly, does not appear to be used to prove the Navier Stokes theorem proposed by OpenAI. It is instead proven as one of the steps
in the Lean compilation phase, but it is not directly used.
    8The Lean proof actually uses w = u − v and π = p − P , with the sign difference carried through in further definitions.
    9A large part of the NL proof of Lemma 10.5 addresses this issue; ultimately, it suffices to show that ∇π = ∇π in the sense of
                                                                                                                      ∗
distributions.
                       WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                                11


   The NL proof now tries to bound φ4R π∗ . The strategy here is to move φ4R into the argument of the Riesz
transformations in the definition of π∗ ; doing so ensures that these Riesz transforms are being applied to
functions with compact support in Lp spaces. In doing so one must pay a penalty, since aRi b ̸= Ri ab in
general for functions a, b. Hence (10.18) in the NL paper establishes that
                                        X                       X
                               φ4R π∗ =      Ri Rj (φ4R gij ) +  [φ4R , Ri Rj ]gij                    (3.6)
                                                 i,j                     i,j

where [·, ·] is the standard commutator.
   There are a number of differences in the approach the Lean argument uses here. As mentioned before, the
proof in Lean takes out a factor of φ2R instead of φ4R . Furthermore, it does not consider π∗ in the distributional
sense, but rather directly considers its application on the relevant test function. Mathematically, the Lean
argument is the following calculation
     ˆ                    ˆ                      Xˆ
                                     7
         π∗ w · ∇χR = π∗ w · 8φR ∇φR = 8                  gij Ri Rj (w · φ7R ∇φR )
                                                        i,j
                                Xˆ                                         Xˆ
                          =8            φ2R gij Ri Rj (w · φ5R ∇φR ) + 8         gij [Ri Rj , φ2R ](w · φ5R ∇φR ).        (3.7)
                                i,j                                        i,j

    Both the NL proof and Lean proof then attempt to bound the first term in (3.6) and (3.7) respectively10.
Here, there are substantial differences. The NL proof attempts to obtain an L3/2 bound on the first term. It
uses Hölder’s inequality to show that φ4R gij ∈ L3/2 and the L3/2 → L3/2 boundedness of the Riesz trans-
forms (which is established by citing [53]) to get a bound of the form ∥Ri Rj (φ4 gij )∥3/2 ⩽ C∥φ4 gij ∥3/2 ⩽
C ′ (∥φ4R w∥6 + 1)∥w∥2 ⩽ C ′′ (BR + 1), where C, C ′ , C ′′ are all (potentially different) constants that can
depend on T .
    By contrast, the Lean proof does not rely on the above citation [53]. Instead, it uses a combination of
Hölder’s inequality (with Hölder conjugates 6 and 6/5), a Sobolev embedding theorem (bounding the L6
norm by a multiple of the L2 norm of the derivative, because this is an argument done over the spatial variables
which are in three dimensions), an interchange of derivatives with the Riesz transform (which comes from the
Fourier multipliers) and the boundedness of the Riesz operators from L2 → L2 (which follows easily from
considering the Fourier multipliers of these operators), with the following calculation
                     ˆ
                       φ2R gij Ri Rj (w · φ5R ∇φR ) ⩽ ∥φ2R gij ∥6/5 ∥Ri Rj (w · φ5R ∇φR )∥6

                                                              ⩽ C∥φ2R gij ∥6/5 ∥∇Rij (w · φ5R ∇φR )∥2
                                                              = C∥φ2R gij ∥6/5 ∥Rij ∇(w · φ5R ∇φR )∥2
                                                              ⩽ C∥φ2R gij ∥6/5 ∥∇(w · φ5R ∇φR )∥2 ,

where C is a constant from the Sobolev inequality. The Lean proof then bounds (using the product rule), for
x ∈ R3 (and fixing the time parameter)

            ∥∇(w · φ5R ∇φR )(x)∥ℓ2 ⩽ φ5R (x)∥∇φR (x)∥ℓ2 ∥∇w(x)∥op + φ5R ∥∇2 φR (x)∥op ∥w(x)∥ℓ2
                                             + 5φR (x)4 ∥∇φR (x)∥2ℓ2 ∥w(x)∥ℓ2 .

   Some further simplification is done (see for example norm fderiv r le amplitude), but ultimately
this expression leads to the AR /R + 1/R2 term present in (3.5). When φR (x) was defined, it was done so that
φR (x) ∈ [0, 1], ∥∇φR (x)∥ℓ2 ⩽ C/R and ∥∇2 φR (x)∥op ⩽ C2 /R2 . The AR term comes from moving φ4R
inside the norm in ∥∇w(x)∥op .

   10We do not comment here on how the second sum is treated by Lean and the NL, since differences in the bound and approach can

easily be seen by observing the first sum.
12                                    A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*

                                    1/2
   Finally, we note that the BR + 1 term comes from using the definition of gij = wi wj + wi uj +
ui wj to bound ∥φ2R gij ∥6/5 . Indeed, the lean proof bounds both ∥φ2R wi wj ∥6/5 and ∥φ2R ui wj ∥6/5 separ-
ately as follows. Firstly, ∥φ2R wi wj ∥6/5 ⩽ ∥φR w∥212/5 and then an interpolation inequality is used to get
                   3/4        1/4         1/4
∥φw∥12/5 ⩽ ∥w∥2 ∥φ4 w∥6 ⩽ CBR . Secondly, to bound ∥φ2R ui wj ∥6/5 a simple application of Hölder
gives ∥φ2R ui wj ∥6/5 ⩽ ∥u∥3 ∥w∥2 ⩽ C . This argument is also distinct from the NL proof, where no 12/5
interpolation is present in the proof of Lemma 10.5.

3.3. Mistranslations and OpenAI’s announced Euler proof. Alongside its Navier-Stokes announcement,
OpenAI reported finite-time blow-up for the unforced incompressible Euler equations on R3 , starting from
smooth, compactly supported initial data. The Euler blow-up and well posedness question has a long history,
and we will – as in the Navier-Stokes case – only mention a small subset of results here [2, 5, 12, 13, 16, 17, 19,
21, 34].
   The format of the announced Euler paper is similar to the Navier-Stokes. There is a NL proof and an
autoformalised Lean proof. As in the Navier-Stokes case, it is natural to ask whether this formalisation in
Lean represents a semantically faithful translation of the NL paper, so that we can conclude that the NL paper
represents a correct proof. It is beyond the scope of this paper to carefully examine the autoformalisation of
the Euler proof in a similar way to what we have done in this paper with the Navier-Stokes case. However,
based on some examinations of the autoformalisation of the Euler case – with both AI and manual tools – we
think that the Euler proof will be another great case study for mistranslations in practice.
   We encourage other readers to examine the autoformalisation of OpenAI’s Euler NL proof and determine if
there are mistranslations. Our prediction is based on preliminary examinations, but our assessment is that the
likelihood of substantial mistranslations is very high.

3.4. Why would mistranslations happen? When success is judged solely by obtaining a Lean proof which
successfully compiles, the procedure followed by the AI can be summarised as follows.
        Input: A faithful Lean translation X ′ of an NL theorem X and an alleged NL proof Y of X.
        while no proof of X ′ has been verified do
          The AI revises Y ′ using Y as a guide (that is, the AI attempts a ‘translation’ of Y into Y ′ )
          The AI checks if Y ′ is a valid Lean proof of X ′ .
        end while
        Output: the verified proof Y ′ .
The acceptance criterion tests whether Y ′ proves X ′ in Lean. It does not check whether the reasoning in Y
has been preserved. A revision may repair an error or replace a correct argument by another one, just as in
the above examples. Both count as success under this criterion, and neither establishes fidelity to the original
purported proof. In fact, since the above procedure accepts any valid Lean proof, if the original NL proof is
indeed incorrect, the AI is incentivised to find a different proof.

Remark 3.4 (Why AI cannot just translate the correct Lean proof back to English/LaTeX). It is natural to
ask whether these mistranslation issues could be avoided by simply back-translating the produced Lean proof
into NL and comparing with the original NL proof. It then remains, however, to establish both that the back-
translation semantically faithfully represents the formal proof, and that its reasoning corresponds to the original
argument. That is, back-translation requires further checks to ensure correspondence; it does not escape the
objections raised in this section. In other words, we reach the same issue of semantic faithfulness not present
in the outline for (i) but available only with autoformalisation in (ii) above, just going in the reverse direction.
In summary, this approach is as difficult as type (ii).

         4. L OGIC IN AI: W HY SEMANTIC PRESERVATION IN AI AUTOFORMALISATION IS HARD

   For generations, logicians, mathematicians, linguists and philosophers have vigorously debated questions
concerning natural and formal languages, semantics, and semantic preservation in translation [8, 27, 30, 38–
                   WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                         13


40, 43–45, 56, 59, 60]. For standard background on formal languages, interpretations and deductive systems,
see [22, Chapters 1–2]. In autoformalisation semantic preservation becomes particularly delicate because of
the need to resolve ambiguities, as we will see below. Throughout, we use N = {0, 1, 2, . . .}, as in Lean’s
Nat.

4.1. Logic in autoformalisation: Resolving ambiguities is harder than the Halting problem. A crucial
problem facing any AI autoformaliser is the task of resolving ambiguities. Note that ambiguities may not
always come from the fact that NLs produce ambiguous statements. Indeed, as the following example demon-
strates, ambiguities can come from the fact that well-definedness of mathematical objects can depend on
computational problems. This fact indicates that the hardness of resolving such an ambiguity is induced by
the hardness of solving certain computational problems. Hence, results from foundations of mathematics &
computation – such as the SCI hierarchy/arithmetical hierarchy – become important in order to understand the
difficulty of resolving ambiguities.

Example 4.1 (A hidden existence presupposition causing ambiguities). An author of a textbook constructs
explicitly a recursive enumeration (that is, there exists a computer program that can list them) {pe }e∈N of
polynomials in k + 1 variables with integer coefficients. Later on, they write down a particular value of e, and
define ne to be the least natural number n for which pe (n, x1 , . . . , xk ) = 0 has no solution in natural numbers
x1 , . . . , xk . They then define the real number re = 1/(ne + 1) and make the claim that it is obvious that
(re + 1)2 = re2 + 2re + 1.

   At first glance, this may seem like a trivial example to autoformalise. Indeed, the conclusion that (re +1)2 =
 2
re + 2re + 1 is elementary to establish in Lean. The problem is the following: For Lean to prove that
(re + 1)2 = re2 + 2re + 1, then re must be well-defined as a rational number. In particular, it must be
established whether or not there exists an n such that pe (n, x1 , . . . , xk ) = 0 has no natural-number solution
x1 , . . . , xk . This issue causes an ambiguity: can Example 4.1 be faithfully translated to Lean at all? The
answer is as follows: yes, if re is well defined, and no if re is not well defined (when ne does not exist). An AI
autoformaliser aiming to translate Example 4.1 preserving the semantics is faced with the problem of resolving
this ambiguity. If re is not well-defined, the AI autoformaliser should not attempt to translate in order to make
Lean accept the translation.

Remark 4.2 (A semantic preserving AI autoformaliser must refrain from translating in certain cases). Note
that if the AI autoformaliser attempts to ‘translate’ Example 4.1 when re is not well defined – and Lean accepts
the ‘translation’ – the ‘translation’ cannot be semantically faithful, it must be a mistranslation. This begs the
following question:
         Can an AI autoformaliser resolve the ambiguity in Example 4.1 in general? That is, given
        e ∈ N, can an AI autoformaliser determine when re is well defined?
The answer to this problem comes from Hilbert’s 10th problem [35] when k ⩾ 9:
         No, such an AI autoformaliser can never exist, even if one could solve the Halting problem.
See Appendix A and Theorem A.3 for a detailed explanation of this statement. Example 4.1 shows why
semantic preservation in mathematics is hard. In general, an AI cannot determine when a statement is ambigu-
ous – and thus cannot be translated – and when a statement is not ambiguous and can be faithfully translated.
Moreover, the above result can be strengthened and informally stated as follows:
         Providing semantically faithful AI autoformalisation is harder than any computational prob-
        lem.
See Appendix A.2.1 for a precise statement.

Example 4.3 (A natural attempt to resolve Example 4.1). It is natural to ask why one cannot simply apply
the following algorithm, which may fail to halt and hence does not directly contradict the negative result
concerning Example 4.1 above:
14                                  A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


          Input: Example 4.1 and e ∈ N (recall that e uniquely defines the claim in Example 4.1).
          while no translation of Example 4.1 has been verified by Lean do
            The AI revises an attempted translation Y ′ of Example 4.1 into Lean.
            The AI checks if Y ′ is accepted by Lean.
          end while
          Output: the accepted translation Y ′ .
At face value, it seems like this methodology would only accept a translation when ne is defined, and thus all
choices of e for which the claim that (re + 1)2 = re2 + 2re + 1 in Example 4.1 is a true unambiguous statement
would ultimately be resolved.

4.2. Why the algorithm in Example 4.3 cannot solve the problem. There is once again a problem with this
approach. The AI could easily produce an attempted translation Y ′ which uses a Lean definition that supplies
a default value, when ne does not exist, in its proof that (re + 1)2 = re2 + 2re + 1. In particular, for a fixed
e ∈ N, write for n ∈ N the predicate Be (n) as follows:

                         Be (n) ⇐⇒ ∀ (x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ Nk ,    pe (n, x1 , . . . , xk ) ̸= 0.           (4.1)

With this predicate, a ‘translation’ of Example 4.1 in the case where k = 2 and

                                         pe (n, x1 , x2 ) = x1 + x2 − n,                                   (4.2)

to Lean code (that compiles) can be done in the following way, with similar examples possible for a different
choice of e and thus pe . In particular, suppose an AI suggested the following ‘translation’ Y ′ of Example 4.1
into Lean:


     import Mathlib


     def p_e (n x1 x2 : Int) : Int := x1 + x2 - n


     def B_e (n : Nat) : Prop :=
     forall (x1 x2 : Nat), p_e (n : Int) (x1 : Int) (x2 : Int) != 0


     noncomputable def n_e : Nat := sInf {n : Nat | B_e n}


     noncomputable def r_e : Rat := 1 / (n_e + 1)


     theorem example_3_1 : (r_e + 1) ˆ 2 = r_e ˆ 2 + 2 * r_e + 1 := by ring




   Here sInf returns the least element of a nonempty set of natural numbers, but returns 0 when the set is
empty; see Nat.sInf def and Nat.sInf empty in [57]. Thus, if no natural number satisfies Be , the
code silently assigns ne = 0 and re = 1. However, for the polynomial in (4.2), every n ∈ N admits the
natural-number root (x1 , x2 ) = (n, 0), since pe (n, n, 0) = n + 0 − n = 0. Hence, Be (n) is false for every n,
and
                                             {n ∈ N : Be (n)} = ∅.

In particular, re is not well-defined. The ‘proof’ succeeds without resolving the ambiguity and the existence
presupposition because it mistranslates the statement by using sInf;
   Warning: With the above ‘translation’ Y ′ (in the grey box) the algorithm in Example 4.3 will halt and
produce a mistranslation. In this case the semantics of the definition of ne have been completely changed.
Indeed, if the above ‘translation’ into Lean had actually been semantically faithful, it would have implied that
there is an n ∈ N such that pe (n, x1 , x2 ) = x1 + x2 − n has no roots (x1 , x2 ) ∈ N2 – this is false!
                  WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                        15


4.3. The root of the difficulty – Creating semantic preserving autoformalisers is a major open problem.
All the problems discussed in the different examples above can be summarised in one rule of thumb, which
illustrates the root of the problem:
        Lean acceptance (compilation) of translation does not imply semantic preservation.
To illustrate the issue we consider the following example:

Example 4.4 (Lean compilation does not imply semantic preservation). Consider the following two sentences:
    (1) There are infinitely many odd numbers among the natural numbers.
    (2) There are infinitely many prime numbers among the natural numbers.
Changing the word ‘odd’ to ‘prime’ changes the semantics of the first sentence completely, as it becomes
the second sentence. Suppose an AI should translate sentence (1) into Lean. Suppose also that it did so se-
mantically faithfully and Lean compiles. What would have happened if the AI instead had made a mistake
and changed ‘odd’ to ‘prime’, and then translated sentence (2) semantically faithfully to Lean – however, the
intention was to translate sentence (1)? Lean would still compile, yet the ‘translation’ is actually a mistransla-
tion.

    Example 4.4 reiterates the message in §4.2: There are many candidate ‘translations’ that would make Lean
compile – some of them would be semantically faithful translations – but many would be mistranslations. Thus,
it will be up to the AI to choose a semantically faithful translation, Lean does not provide a security net if the
AI provides a mistranslation. This means that the AI is subject to the limitations arising from the foundations
of mathematics and computations as highlighted in §4.1 and Theorem A.3. Indeed, the AI autoformaliser
cannot resolve all ambiguities and must therefore admit that there are many cases for which it will not know
whether a translation is possible or not – even if a semantic translation is possible.
    How to design trustworthy AI autoformalisers – meaning that they will only provide semantically faithful
translations – is beyond the scope of this paper. Such developments will be announced in forthcoming articles.
The key observation, however, is that even the most advanced models of OpenAI are far from achieving this
goal. In particular, creating trustworthy AI autoformalisers that are capable of preserving semantics is a major
open problem.

                                      5. S UMMARY AND PERSPECTIVES

5.1. Attempting semantics-preserving autoformalisation in practice – The Meta attempt. Here is a per-
tinent example of the second type of autoformalisation – faithful semantic translation of a mathematical text –
going awry in practice. During the spring of 2026, Meta declared a new milestone in autoformalisation: they
claimed to have translated 26 mathematics textbooks into Lean, forming a library with 45,000 verified Lean
declarations and around 500,000 lines of Lean code [46]. These claims were, however, swiftly refuted by the
Lean community in the discussion quoted below [32].
     (i) Jack McCarthy: ‘Pg. 17 of the paper claims that 56% of the target statements in this book [i.e. one
         of the 26 books] were formalized, but I could not find a single one which did not contain a fatal error
         like above. The reality is that 0% of the statements here are accurately formalized.’
    (ii) Brian Nugent: ‘I took a look at the algebraic geometry folder and it appears that the things it did
         prove (about 60% of the book according to your website) were exactly the things that are in Mathlib
         and it failed on everything else. [...] claiming “my AI autoformalized this AG textbook” in the state
         that’s its in is simply lying.’
   (iii) Christian Merten: ‘I would like to push back a bit on the point that this project has produced something
         useful on this front.’
Fortunately, in this case, Lean experts were quickly able to detect the mistakes made by the AI in the auto-
formalisation. This may not be the case in the future: proofs produced by autoformalisation are becoming
longer and more complex. For example, Anthropic’s recent autoformalisation of Fermat’s Last Theorem took
16                                   A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


13 million lines of Lean code [10]. The increases in both the number and length of autoformalised proofs will
make it extremely difficult to catch mistranslations.
   The problem of mistranslations by autoformalisation is particularly relevant in the context of building a
unified body of knowledge in Lean, where results are consistent with, and build upon, one another. A single
falsely translated statement in Mathlib means that all further results building upon this statement could be
rendered invalid. Ensuring autoformalisation is done correctly is therefore of utmost importance to ensuring
Lean libraries such as Mathlib remain correct and usable.
   We may ask: why did this autoformalisation project by Meta turn out the way it did? The answer is
that autoformalising AI systems currently follow something akin to the algorithm in Example 4.3 to produce
translations. The project did go beyond this, checking for faithfulness and non-cheating in the translations;
this semantic verification was, however, mainly performed by other AIs [46, Section 3 and Appendix D]. The
fact that this failed highlights the difficulty that AIs have both with producing semantically faithful translations
into Lean and with assessing the accuracy of such translations.

Remark 5.1. The crucial issue is that – as pointed out in Remark 4.2 – a semantic preserving AI formaliser
must refrain from doing a translation in certain cases. The example in §4 and Theorem A.3 show that no AI
autoformaliser can determine when it must refrain from translating and when it should translate. Thus, the
big question is how to design AI autoformalisers that preserve semantics. Current AI based approaches are
typically based on the ‘guessing and checking’ algorithm in Example 4.3, which is doomed to mistranslate
because no AI can determine when it should or should not provide a suggested translation Y ′ (recall the
notation from Example 4.3).

5.2. Semantics-preserving autoformalisation and the future of AI in mathematics. The Leiden Declara-
tion from June 2026 [1] discusses how incorrect use of AI can be harmful to mathematics as a discipline. It
singles out in particular the dangers posed by autoformalisation:
         ‘Current automated techniques can produce plausible but unreliable (or even incorrect) ar-
         guments which are difficult to distinguish from correct mathematical proofs. This applies
         not only to informal arguments, but also to formalizations, where the difficulty lies in the
         translation between computer-encoded and human presentations of concepts.’
The boldface text refers exactly to the issues with the two forms of autoformalisation as discussed in this note.
Even more recently, in September 2026, a declaration titled ‘A Severe Misalignment of AI in Mathematics’ [3]
initiated by 25 Fields medalists brings up other issues related to AI in mathematics:
         ‘But solving problems is only a tool and proxy for achieving the primary goal of conceptual
         understanding and insight. Forgetting this in the world of AI may turn the tool against the
         primary goal. Indeed, the mass production at faster and faster pace of “true/false” statements
         could destroy fertile ground instead of breathing life into new ideas.’
The quote also relates fundamentally to autoformalisation:
      (i) Solving a problem only formally in Lean – without a semantically faithful translation from a correct
          NL argument that humans can read – would typically only be a proxy for the optimal final product
          which should provide understanding of the argument (both an NL argument and a Lean proof with a
          semantically faithful translation between the two). Without the semantically faithful translation, the
          NL argument could even be wrong – which is detrimental to human understanding – but would also
          harm future instalments of AI which rely on massive collections of correct mathematical NL literature
          in the training process.
     (ii) Pure ‘true/false’ statements coming from only Lean proofs (lacking a semantically faithful translation
          from a correct NL argument) can certainly be useful. Indeed, we would like to know if the Riemann
          Hypothesis is true. However, a principal reason for the interest in this problem stems from the belief
          that the techniques and ideas used in a proof could be applied broadly to address other questions and to
                      WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                                     17


          enhance our understanding across analysis, number theory and the many other fields that the Riemann
          Hypothesis touches on. A correct but incomprehensible Lean proof would not have the same value
          – mathematicians will unlikely read millions of lines of Lean code to try to understand. It would be
          even worse if an incorrect NL proof of the Riemann Hypothesis is accepted based on a mistranslated
          Lean proof; we would then have a complete misunderstanding of the facets of this problem.
   As argued above, AI autoformalisers that can guarantee semantically faithful translations do not currently
exist. Thus, developing semantically faithful AI autoformalisation stands as a major open problem, and at-
tempts at quick fixes will typically violate fundamental limitations that date back to Gödel and Turing.


      A PPENDIX A. T HE DIFFICULTY OF RESOLVING AMBIGUITIES AND H ILBERT ’ S 10 TH PROBLEM

A.1. Help from the SCI hierarchy and Hilbert’s 10th problem. Here we continue the presupposition res-
olution discussion from Example 4.1, explaining why no AI can resolve it for all e ∈ N. The basic framework
we use is that of the Solvability Complexity Index (SCI) hierarchy initiated in [28] and further developed
in [4,6,7,14,15,25]. The SCI hierarchy is closely connected to S. Smale’s [49,50] program on the foundations
of computational mathematics and scientific computing. This program motivated the early investigations of
polynomial root-finding by C. McMullen [36, 37, 51] and P. Doyle & C. McMullen [20]. Their work yielded
pioneering classification results within the SCI hierarchy, predating its formal introduction. See also the clas-
sification results in the SCI hierarchy by S. Weinberger [61]. Although some of the mathematics underlying
the SCI hierarchy can be traced back to K. Gödel [26] and A. Turing [58], the newly developed techniques
apply to any model of computation.

A.1.1. An informal introduction to the SCI hierarchy. Here we informally introduce the general SCI hierarchy
(see [6, 14] for the formal definitions). The SCI hierarchy is designed to accommodate all types of compu-
tational problems and categorises the difficulty of computational problems according to the number of limits
required to solve them. A computational problem is given by: a set of inputs Ω (where each element of Ω
specifies a problem instance), a metric space (M, d) of candidate solutions, and a solution map Ξ : Ω ⇒ M
that takes each problem instance to its solution(s) (the double arrow indicates that the solution could be multi-
valued). There is in general also an evaluation set Λ specifying which information about the problem instances
may actually be accessed by an algorithm. This will not be relevant 11 for this appendix. A computational
problem is often specified simply as {Ξ, Ω}, when M and Λ are understood.
    The SCI of a computational problem is defined as the minimal number of limits 12 required to solve that
problem (+∞ if no finite number of limits suffices). The mainstay classes of the hierarchy are the ∆α  m classes,
which are defined for each m ⩾ 0. Here α is related to the model of computation, as explained below.
Informally, we have the following description. Given a collection C of computational problems:
      (i) ∆α 0 is the set of problems that can be computed in finite time, so that they satisfy SCI = 0;
             α
     (ii) ∆1 is the set of problems that can be computed using one limit (they satisfy SCI ⩽ 1) with control of
          the error, i.e., there is a sequence of algorithms {Γn } with d(Γn (A), Ξ(A)) ⩽ 2−n , ∀A ∈ Ω;
    (iii) ∆α 2 is the set of problems that can be computed using one limit (again SCI ⩽ 1) but sans error control,
          i.e., there is a sequence of algorithms {Γn } with limn→∞ Γn (A) = Ξ(A), ∀A ∈ Ω;
    (iv) ∆α  m+1 , for m ⩾ 1, is the set of problems that can be computed by using m limits, (in other words,
          SCI ⩽ m), i.e., there is a family of algorithms {Γnm ,...,n1 } with

                                      lim . . . lim Γnm ,...,n1 (A) = Ξ(A), ∀A ∈ Ω.
                                    nm →∞         n1 →∞


   11For the computational problems discussed in this appendix, each problem instance in Ω is specified entirely by a single natural

number, so Λ amounts to containing only an identity map.
   12This is formalised by the notion of towers of algorithms.
18                                  A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


In general, this hierarchy can only be refined further, beyond these classes, if the metric space M admits
additional structure, such as being totally ordered. On the other hand, the hierarchy typically does not collapse,
so that we have:
                                      ∆α       α      α            α
                                        0 ⊊ ∆1 ⊊ ∆2 ⊊ . . . ⊊ ∆m ⊊ . . . .                                   (A.1)
Depending on the collection C of computational problems, however, the hierarchy (A.1) may terminate for a
finite m or continue for arbitrary large m.

Definition A.1 (The SCI Hierarchy (totally ordered set)). Given the setup above, suppose in addition that M
is a totally ordered set. Define
          Σα    α    α
           0 = Π0 = ∆0 ,

          Σα              α
           1 = {{Ξ, Ω} ∈ ∆2 | ∃ a sequence of algorithms {Γn } s.t. Γn (A) ↗ Ξ(A) ∀A ∈ Ω},

          Πα              α
           1 = {{Ξ, Ω} ∈ ∆2 | ∃ a sequence of algorithms {Γn } s.t. Γn (A) ↘ Ξ(A) ∀A ∈ Ω},

where ↗ and ↘ denotes convergence from below and above respectively, as well as, for m ∈ N,
Σα                α
 m+1 = {{Ξ, Ω} ∈ ∆m+2 | ∃ height m + 1 tower {Γnm+1 ,...,n1 } for {Ξ, Ω} s.t. Γnm+1 (A) ↗ Ξ(A) ∀A ∈ Ω},

Πα                α
 m+1 = {{Ξ, Ω} ∈ ∆m+2 | ∃ height m + 1 tower {Γnm+1 ,...,n1 } for {Ξ, Ω} s.t. Γnm+1 (A) ↘ Ξ(A) ∀A ∈ Ω}.

   See [6] for the formal definition of the towers of algorithms used to define Σα            α
                                                                                   m+1 and Πm+1 above. A
specific case of the definitions of such towers, when the algorithms are Turing machines, is elaborated upon
below. The above definitions apply in particular to the totally ordered metric space M = {0, 1}; this yields
the SCI hierarchy for arbitrary decision problems. Schematically, the general SCI hierarchy can be viewed in
the following way:

                     Πα
                      0                     Πα
                                             1                          Πα
                                                                         2
                      =               ⊊             ⊊             ⊊             ⊊      ⊊
                     ∆α
                      0    ⊊   ∆α
                                1   ⊊     Σα    α
                                           1 ∪ Π1       ⊊   ∆α
                                                             2   ⊊    Σα    α
                                                                       2 ∪ Π2    ⊊ ∆α
                                                                                    3 ⊊  ···                (A.2)
                      =              ⊊              ⊊             ⊊             ⊊     ⊊
                     Σα
                      0                     Σα
                                             1                          Σα
                                                                         2

Note that the Σα        α
                1 and Π1 classes are crucial as they guarantee the existence of algorithms that will never make
mistakes. They thus become crucial in computer-assisted proofs, see [6, Section 3].
    We also use standard facts about the arithmetical hierarchy and oracle computability, for which we refer the
reader to [52, Chapter 4]. The α in the ∆α  m classes can refer to any model of computation (e.g. the classical
Turing model [58] or the Blum-Shub-Smale model [9]). Hereon, we will take α = A where A refers to the
arithmetic model of computation. This means the algorithms are all Turing machines i.e. the classical Turing
model.

Remark A.2 (SCI hierarchy generalises the arithmetical hierarchy). We note that the arithmetical hierarchy
becomes a special case of the SCI hierarchy [6, Proposition A.8]. More precisely, with α = A and M =
{0, 1}, if we restrict to computational problems asking about membership in a subset of N, we have ΣA  m = Σm ,
                                                                                                                0

ΠA         0         A       0                                                0     0         0
  m = Πm and ∆m = ∆m for every m ⩾ 0 [6, Proposition A.8]. Here, Σm , Πm and ∆m are the classical
classification classes from the arithmetical hierarchy. We will make use of this fact in the following results.

Notation (Reducibility). For sets A, B ⊆ N, we write A ⩽m B if there is a total computable function
f : N → N such that
                                   (∀n ∈ N)[n ∈ A ⇐⇒ f (n) ∈ B].
In this case we say A is many-one reducible to B, witnessed by f . We write A ⩽T B if there is an oracle
Turing machine which, with B on the oracle tape, computes the characteristic function of A. In this case we
say A is Turing reducible to B. The Turing degree of a set A ⊆ N is the set of all C ⊆ N that simultaneously
satisfy A ⩽T C and C ⩽T A. We say A is Σ0n -complete if A ∈ Σ0n and also C ⩽m A for every C ∈ Σ0n .
                    WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                              19


Similarly, A is Π0n -complete if A ∈ Π0n and C ⩽m A for every C ∈ Π0n . We fix an integer-coefficient
polynomial pairing function ⟨ , ⟩ : N2 → N given by

                               ⟨x, y⟩ = (x + y)(x + y + 1) + 2y, for (x, y) ∈ N2 ,

which is a computable injection, by [41, Section 1, p. 1001]. By iteration, for each n ⩾ 2 we also obtain and
hereon fix an n-ary pairing function ⟨ , ..., ⟩ : Nn → N, which is also an integer-coefficient polynomial.

A.2. Resolving ambiguities is hard. Recall the condition defining ne in Example 4.1. For an enumeration
(pe )e∈N of integer-coefficient polynomials in the variables n, x1 , . . . , xk , write

                           Be (n) ⇐⇒ (∀(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ Nk ) pe (n, x1 , . . . , xk ) ̸= 0.                     (A.3)

Then ne is defined to be the least n ∈ N for which Be (n) holds, provided such an n exists, and is undefined
otherwise. Completeness throughout this subsection refers to completeness under many-one reductions.

Theorem A.3. Fix k ⩾ 9. For any computable enumeration (pe )e∈N of all polynomials with integer coeffi-
cients in k + 1 variables, let Be be as in (A.3). Then the set

                                          d := {e ∈ N : (∃n ∈ N) Be (n)}

is Σ02 -complete. In particular, no AI can always determine whether the number ne specified in Example 4.1 is
well-defined, even with an oracle for the Halting problem.

Proof. We use the usual µ notation for minimum search [52]. By the assumption that the enumeration e 7→ pe
is computable and the assumption that pe has integer coefficients, there exists an algorithm that decides if
pe (n, x1 , . . . xk ) = 0 given inputs n, x1 , . . . , xk . The condition defining membership in d is thus given by the
quantifiers (∃n ∈ N)(∀x1 ∈ N)...(∀xk ∈ N) over a decidable relation, so we have d ∈ Σ02 .
    To obtain Σ02 -completeness, fix a standard effective enumeration (Pe )e∈N of all Turing machines. For
e, n ∈ N, write Pe (n) ↓ when Pe (n) halts and Pe (n) ↑ when Pe (n) does not halt. Recall that a Diophantine
set [35] is a set A ⊆ N that can be represented using a finite number of unknowns, in the sense that there exists
an integer s ⩾ 1 and an integer-coefficient polynomial p(n, x1 , ..., xs ) in s + 1 variables with:

                            n ∈ A ⇐⇒ (∃(x1 , . . . , xs ) ∈ Ns ) p(n, x1 , . . . , xs ) = 0.

The Davis–Putnam–Robinson–Matiyasevich (DPRM) theorem [35] states that the Diophantine sets are pre-
cisely the computably enumerable sets. The nine-unknown refinement [31] of the DPRM theorem permits
every computably enumerable relation over N to be represented using nine unknowns. Applying this to the
computably enumerable set K1 = {⟨e, n⟩ ∈ N : Pe (n) ↓}, we find there exists a fixed integer-coefficient
polynomial q0 (ñ, x1 , ..., x9 ), where ñ is a variable, such that ⟨e, n⟩ ∈ K1 if and only if q0 (⟨e, n⟩, x1 , ..., x9 )
admits a root (x1 , ..., x9 ) ∈ N9 . Defining the polynomial q(e, n, x1 , ..., x9 ) := q0 (⟨e, n⟩, x1 , ..., x9 ), we have
for each e, n ∈ N:

                        Pe (n) ↓    ⇐⇒       (∃(x1 , . . . , x9 ) ∈ N9 ) q(e, n, x1 , . . . , x9 ) = 0.

For k > 9, regard q as independent of the additional variables x10 , . . . , xk . Define the binary predicate
W ⊆ N2 by
                               W (e, j) ⇐⇒ pj (n, x1 , ..., xk ) ≡ q(e, n, x1 , ..., xk ),
where ≡ denotes that the two polynomials, whose variables are n, x1 , ..., xk , have coinciding coefficients;
given e and j this is decidable. Since (pe )e∈N enumerates all integer-coefficient polynomials in k +1 variables,
the function t(e) := µj[W (e, j)] is well-defined and computable. By the definitions of d and q, we have

                                        t(e) ∈ d     ⇐⇒        (∃n ∈ N) Pe (n) ↑

In other words, t is a computable many-one reduction from

                                      NTOT := {e ∈ N : (∃n ∈ N) Pe (n) ↑}
20                                        A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


to d. Since NTOT is Σ02 -complete, so is d. By Post’s theorem [52, Chapter 4], we have d ⩽T ∅′ ⇐⇒ d ∈ ∆02 .
Since d ∈ Σ02 , we have d ⩽T ∅′ ⇐⇒ d ∈ Π02 . But whenever a set belongs to Π02 so too does any set that
(many-one) reduces to it; thus if d ∈ Π02 then by Σ02 -completeness we would have Σ02 ⊆ Π02 , contradicting
strictness of the arithmetical hierarchy [52, Corollary 4.2.3, p. 85]. Consequently, we cannot have d ⩽T ∅′ .
Since d is exactly the set of e for which ne in Example 4.1 is well-defined, the final claim follows.     □

   The preceding result can be extended to arbitrarily high levels in the SCI hierarchy whilst simultaneously
retaining polynomial predicates and the least-number construction of Example 4.1. We first generalise the
predicate Be (n). For l ⩾ 2, consider an enumeration (pe )e∈N of integer-coefficient polynomials in the l−1+k
variables
                                                  n, z2 , . . . , zl−1 , x1 , . . . , xk .
                                                                                                          (l)
Let Qj denote ∃ for odd j and ∀ for even j. We omit z2 , . . . , zl−1 when l = 2. Define Be (n) by the following
two cases. For even l, again omitting z2 , . . . zl−1 when l = 2, we have
                      Be(l) (n) ⇐⇒ (Q2 z2 ∈ N) · · · (Ql−1 zl−1 ∈ N) (∀(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ Nk )
                                                                                                                               (A.4a)
                                        pe (n, z2 , . . . , zl−1 , x1 , . . . , xk ) ̸= 0,
For odd l ⩾ 3,
                      Be(l) (n) ⇐⇒ (Q2 z2 ∈ N) · · · (Ql−1 zl−1 ∈ N) (∃(x1 , . . . , xk ) ∈ Nk )
                                                                                                                               (A.4b)
                                        pe (n, z2 , . . . , zl−1 , x1 , . . . , xk ) = 0.
                                                                               (2)
Note that (using the same k and polynomial enumeration) Be (n) is Be (n). As in [52], we write ∅(0) = ∅
and ∅(j+1) for the Halting problem relative to ∅(j) , for j ∈ N.

Theorem A.4 (Presupposition resolution at arbitrary arithmetical levels). Fix l ⩾ 2 and k ⩾ 9. Fix a com-
                                                                                                     (l)
putable enumeration (pe )e∈N of all integer-coefficient polynomials in l − 1 + k variables, and let Be be as
in (A.4). Then
                                             dl := {e ∈ N : (∃n ∈ N) Be(l) (n)}
                                                                                                                         (l)
is Σ0l -complete. In particular, no algorithm can always determine whether the least n for which Be (n) holds
is well-defined, even with an oracle for ∅(l−1) .
                                                 (l)
Proof. Fix l ⩾ 2. By its definition, Be (n) is a Π0l−1 predicate. Indeed, it begins with l − 2 alternating
quantifiers - the first being a universal quantifier – and the subsequent k quantifiers are all either existential
or all universal; the affected predicate therein, namely pe (n, z2 , ..., zl−1 , x1 , ..., xk ) = 0, is decidable because
the polynomial enumeration is computable and the computation is over the integers. That is, dl ∈ Σ0l . For
Σ0l -hardness, let A ⊆ N be any Σ0l set. By definition, there exists a computable relation R ⊆ Nl+1 such that

                             a ∈ A ⇐⇒ (Q1 z1 ∈ N) · · · (Ql zl ∈ N) R(a, z1 , . . . , zl ).                                     (A.5)

Define a computably enumerable relation on the remaining parameters by
                                             
                                             (∃z ∈ N) R(a, z , . . . , z ),                       for l odd;
                                                  l            1          l
                C(a, z1 , . . . , zl−1 ) ⇐⇒
                                             (∃zl ∈ N) ¬R(a, z1 , . . . , zl ),                   for l even.

By the nine-unknown refinement of the DPRM theorem [31, 35] applied to the computably enumerable set
{⟨a, z1 , ..., zl−1 ⟩ ∈ N : C(a, z1 , ..., zl−1 )}, there exists a fixed integer-coefficient polynomial q0 (ñ, x1 , ..., x9 ),
where ñ is a variable, such that

                C(a, z1 , ..., zl−1 ) ⇐⇒ (∃(x1 , ..., x9 ) ∈ N9 ) q0 (⟨a, z1 , ..., zl−1 ⟩, x1 , ...., x9 ) = 0.

Defining the polynomial q(a, z1 , ..., zl−1 , x1 , ..., x9 ) := q0 (⟨a, z1 , ..., zl−1 ⟩, x1 , ...., x9 ), we have

               C(a, z1 , . . . , zl−1 ) ⇐⇒ (∃(x1 , . . . , x9 ) ∈ N9 ) q(a, z1 , . . . , zl−1 , x1 , . . . , x9 ) = 0.
                    WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                                        21


If l is odd, this representation permits (A.5) to be expressed as
                           a ∈ A ⇐⇒ (∃z1 ∈ N) · · · (∀zl−1 ∈ N)(∃(x1 , ..., x9 ) ∈ N9 )
                                          q(a, z1 , ..., zl−1 , x1 , ..., x9 ) = 0.

If l is even, negation of the defining condition for C gives

         (∀zl ∈ N) R(a, z1 , . . . , zl ) ⇐⇒ (∀(x1 , . . . , x9 ) ∈ N9 ) q(a, z1 , . . . , zl−1 , x1 , . . . , x9 ) ̸= 0,

so that (A.5) can be expressed as
                    a ∈ A ⇐⇒ (∃z1 ∈ N)(∀z2 ∈ N) · · · (∃zl−1 ∈ N)(∀(x1 , ..., x9 ) ∈ N9 )
                                    q(a, z1 , ..., zl−1 , x1 , ..., x9 ) ̸= 0.

Consequently, regardless of the parity of l, we have replaced the final quantification (Ql zl ∈ N) in (A.5) sans
appending an additional quantifier alternation. When k > 9, we regard q as independent of the additional
variables x10 , . . . , xk . Define the binary predicate W ⊆ N2 by

                 W (a, j) ⇐⇒ pj (n, z2 , ..., zl−1 , x1 , ..., xk ) ≡ q(a, n, z2 ..., zl−1 , x1 , ..., xk ),

where ≡ denotes that the two polynomials, whose variables are n, z2 , ..., zl−1 , x1 , ..., xk , have coinciding
coefficients; given a and j this is decidable. Since (pe )e∈N enumerates all integer-coefficient polynomials
in l − 1 + k variables, the function t(a) := µj[W (a, j)] is well-defined and computable. The preceding
equivalences imply that
                                                  a ∈ A ⇐⇒ t(a) ∈ dl .
                                                                                                                            (l)
That is, A ⩽m dl , establishing Σ0l -completeness of dl . By definition of dl , the least n ∈ N satisfying Be (n)
exists exactly when e ∈ dl . By Post’s theorem [52], we have dl ⩽T ∅(l−1) ⇐⇒ dl ∈ ∆0l . Since dl ∈ Σ0l , this
becomes dl ⩽T ∅(l−1) ⇐⇒ dl ∈ Π0l . But whenever a set belongs to Π0l so too does any set that (many-one)
reduces to it; thus if dl ∈ Π0l , then by Σ0l -completeness we would have Σ0l ⊆ Π0l , contrary to the strictness of
the arithmetical hierarchy. Consequently, we cannot have dl ⩽T ∅(l−1) .                                          □
                                                                                                            (2)
   When we use the same k and the same polynomial enumeration, the case l = 2 gives Be (n) = Be (n) for
every n ∈ N, so that d2 = d, which recovers Theorem A.3. Moreover, for every l ⩾ 2, the complement of dl
is Π0l -complete, and dl has the Turing degree of ∅(l) (since ∅(l) is Σ0l -complete by Post’s Theorem [52]). For
                                    (l)                             (l)                       (l)           (l)
each fixed l ⩾ 2 and e ∈ N, let ne be the least n for which Be (n) holds, and define re = 1/(ne + 1).
         (l)    (l)                                                                                     (l)         (l)
Both ne and re are left undefined if there is no such n. Replacing ne and re in Example 4.1 by ne and re ,
                                                                                    (l)             (l)         (l)
respectively, gives the same least-number construction. The displayed identity (re + 1)2 = (re )2 + 2re + 1
                                                                                                (l)
remains elementary to establish, while as e varies, deciding whether the stated definition of re refers to a well-
defined number is a Σ0l -complete problem. Accordingly, we have established the existence of presupposition-
resolution problems of unbounded finite arithmetical complexity.
   For the SCI classification of the presupposition resolution problem we have thus far discussed, we use
arithmetic (computable) towers; see [15, Definitions 5.2–5.6] for the formal definition. The input space Ω
is N and the output space is M = {0, 1} with the discrete metric. A tower of height h ⩾ 1 for a function
Ξ : Ω → {0, 1} is given by a bottom-level computable function Γ : Ω × Nh → {0, 1} that satisfies

                                       Ξ(e) = lim · · · lim Γ(e, s1 , . . . , sh ),
                                                  s1 →∞       sh →∞

for each e ∈ Ω. In particular, each successive limit exists (for every fixed choice of the outer indices). An
arithmetical tower of height zero for Ξ is simply a computable function Γ : Ω → {0, 1} with Γ = Ξ. Given
any function Ξ : Ω → {0, 1}, we define SCIA (Ξ) to be the least h ⩾ 0 for which there is an arithmetical tower
of height h for Ξ; we define SCIA (Ξ) = +∞ when no such tower exists. We also define ∆A      h+1 to denote the
class of problems Ξ with SCIA (Ξ) ⩽ h, for each h ⩾ 1.
22                                        A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


Corollary A.5 (Unbounded SCI for presupposition resolution). For each l ⩾ 2, define Ξdl : Ω → {0, 1} by
Ξdl (e) = 1 if and only if e ∈ dl . With k ⩾ 9 and the enumeration in Theorem A.4, we have
                                            SCIA (Ξdl ) = l          for every l ⩾ 2.
Equivalently, the decision problem for the set dl lies in ∆A      A
                                                           l+1 \ ∆l .

Proof. Fix l ⩾ 2. Since dl ∈ Σ0l , we have dl ∈ ΣAl (as the SCI hierarchy generalises the arithmetical hierarchy,
as discussed above). This means SCIA (Ξdl ) ⩽ l.
    On the other hand, if SCIA (Ξdl ) < l, then there is an arithmetical tower of height 0 ⩽ h < l for Ξdl .
This would give that dl ∈ ∆0h+1 (again using that the SCI hierarchy generalises the arithmetical hierarchy)
and thus also dl ∈ ∆0l since h < l. But dl is Σ0l -complete so cannot lie in ∆0l ( else Σ0l ⊆ Π0l , contrary to
strictness of the arithmetical hierarchy [52, Corollary 4.2.3, p. 85]). This means SCIA (Ξdl ) ⩾ l. We conclude
that SCIA (Ξdl ) = l, as required.                                                                             □

A.2.1. The problem of resolving ambiguities has SCI = ∞. Recall Example 4.1 and Be (n) from (4.1). Recall
that the ambiguity in Example 4.1 – whether ne is well defined or not – was caused by the following question:
          ‘Is {n ∈ N : Be (n)} empty or not?
Note that we could have made Example 4.1, and the definition of ne , more general yielding an ambiguity
caused by the question:
                            (l)
          ‘Is {n ∈ N : Be (n)} empty or not?
          (l)
Here, Be (n) is defined for integers l ⩾ 2 in (A.4). Note that a trustworthy AI autoformaliser that will
always provide an output: either a semantically faithful translation or ‘this statement cannot be translated’
must resolve the above question for each e ∈ N and l ⩾ 2. However, by Corollary A.5 – for each fixed l – this
problem has SCI = l. Hence, the problem of answering the above question for all e ∈ N and l ⩾ 2 has SCI
= ∞. We can now make sense of our informal statement:
           Providing semantically faithful AI autoformalisation is harder than any computational prob-
          lem.
By ‘semantically faithful AI autoformalisation’ we mean a trustworthy AI autoformaliser that will always
provide an output – as above. Also, by ‘any computational problem’ we mean any computational problem
with finite SCI. So our statement above – which was made informal for the purpose of readability – means:
Every trustworthy semantically faithful AI formaliser (as above) must solve problems that are harder than any
problem with finite SCI.

Remark A.6. The requirement that k ⩾ 9 represents the current state of literature on the DPRM theorem;
this is an active area of research with a recent refinement [54] lowering the bound from k ⩾ 11 to k ⩾ 10 in
the case where x ∈ Zk (in our theorem and proof we work with x ∈ Nk , where the best known bound for Σ02
completeness of d is k ⩾ 9).

                                                          R EFERENCES
 [1] J. Alper et al. Leiden Declaration on Artificial Intelligence and Mathematics, 2026. 2 June 2026. doi:10.5281/zenodo.20302944.
 [2] L. Alpöge and T. Buckmaster. Blowup for the Euler Equations with Smooth Forcing. Preprint, 2026.
 [3] A. Avila et al. A Severe Misalignment of AI in Mathematics, 2026. 11 September 2026. doi:10.5281/zenodo.22737750.
 [4] A. Bastounis, A. C. Hansen, and V. Vlačić. The extended Smale’s 9th problem – On computational barriers and paradoxes in
     estimation, regularisation, computer-assisted proofs and learning. arXiv:2110.15734, 2021.
 [5] J. T. Beale, T. Kato, and A. Majda. Remarks on the breakdown of smooth solutions for the 3-D Euler equations. Communications in
     Mathematical Physics, 94(1):61–66, 1984.
 [6] J. Ben-Artzi, M. J. Colbrook, A. C. Hansen, O. Nevanlinna, and M. Seidel. Computing spectra – On the solvability complexity index
     hierarchy and towers of algorithms. arXiv:1508.03280v5, 2020.
 [7] J. Ben-Artzi, A. C. Hansen, O. Nevanlinna, and M. Seidel. New barriers in complexity theory: On the solvability complexity index
     and the towers of algorithms. Comptes Rendus Mathematique, 353(10):931 – 936, 2015.
 [8] F. Berto and L. Hornischer. Cognitive synonymy: a dead parrot? Philosophical Studies, 180(9):2727–2752, 2023.
                      WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                                           23


 [9] L. Blum, M. Shub, and S. Smale. On a theory of computation and complexity over the real numbers: NP-completeness, recursive
     functions and universal machines. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society (New Series), 21(1):1–46, 1989.
[10] K. Buzzard. FLT: Anthropic has beaten me to it. Xena Project blog, 2026. 4 September 2026. Online article.
[11] L. Caffarelli, R. Kohn, and L. Nirenberg. Partial regularity of suitable weak solutions of the Navier–Stokes equations. Communica-
     tions on Pure and Applied Mathematics, 35(6):771–831, 1982.
[12] J. Chen and T. Y. Hou. Stable nearly self-similar blowup of the 2D Boussinesq and 3D Euler equations with smooth data I: Analysis,
     2022. Preprint; version 4, revised 16 August 2026.
[13] J. Chen and T. Y. Hou. Stable Nearly Self-Similar Blowup of the 2D Boussinesq and 3D Euler Equations with Smooth Data II:
     Rigorous Numerics. Multiscale Modeling & Simulation, 23(1):25–130, 2025.
[14] M. J. Colbrook, V. Antun, and A. C. Hansen. The difficulty of computing stable and accurate neural networks: On the barriers of
     deep learning and Smale’s 18th problem. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119(12):e2107151119, Mar. 2022.
[15] M. J. Colbrook and A. C. Hansen. The foundations of spectral computations via the Solvability Complexity Index hierarchy. J. Eur.
     Math. Soc., 25(12):4639–4718, 2022.
[16] P. Constantin, C. L. Fefferman, and A. J. Majda. Geometric constraints on potentially singular solutions for the 3-D Euler equations.
     Communications in Partial Differential Equations, 21(3–4):559–571, 1996.
[17] D. Cordoba and L. Martinez-Zoroa. Finite time singularities of smooth solutions for the 2D incompressible porous media (IPM)
     equation with a smooth source. arXiv:2410.22920 [math.AP], 2024. Preprint; version 3, revised 13 February 2025.
[18] D. Cordoba, L. Martinez-Zoroa, and F. Zheng. Finite time blow-up for the hypodissipative Navier Stokes equations with a force in
     L1t Cx1,ϵ ∩ L∞   2
                  t Lx . Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 250:38, 2026.
[19] C. De Lellis and L. Székelyhidi, Jr. The Euler equations as a differential inclusion. Annals of Mathematics, 170(3):1417–1436, 2009.
[20] P. Doyle and C. McMullen. Solving the quintic by iteration. Acta Mathematica, 163(3-4):151–180, 1989.
[21] T. M. Elgindi. Finite-time singularity formation for C 1,α solutions to the incompressible Euler equations on R3 . Annals of Math-
     ematics, 194(3):647–727, 2021.
[22] H. B. Enderton. A Mathematical Introduction to Logic. Academic Press, 2 edition, 2001.
[23] C. L. Fefferman. Existence and smoothness of the Navier–Stokes equation. In J. Carlson, A. Jaffe, and A. Wiles, editors, The
     Millennium Prize Problems, pages 57–67. Clay Mathematics Institute and American Mathematical Society, 2006.
[24] H. Fujita and T. Kato. On the Navier–Stokes initial value problem. I. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis, 16(4):269–315,
     1964.
[25] L. E. Gazdag, A. Bastounis, and A. C. Hansen. Generalised hardness of approximation and the SCI hierarchy – on determining the
     boundaries of training algorithms in AI. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, July 2026.
[26] K. Gödel. Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und verwandter Systeme I. Monatshefte für mathematik
     und physik, 38(1):173–198, 1931.
[27] T. Hales. An argument for controlled natural languages in mathematics, 2019. Position essay, 20 June 2019.
[28] A. C. Hansen. On the solvability complexity index, the n-pseudospectrum and approximations of spectra of operators. Journal of
     the American Mathematical Society, 24(1):81–124, 2011.
[29] T. Y. Hou. Potentially Singular Behavior of the 3D Navier–Stokes Equations. Foundations of Computational Mathematics, 23:2251–
     2299, 2023.
[30] T. F. Icard and L. S. Moss. A Simple Logic of Concepts. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 52:705–730, 2023.
[31] J. P. Jones. Universal Diophantine equation. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 47(3):549–571, 1982. doi:10.2307/2273588.
[32] Lean community. Atlas (Meta). Zulip discussion in the Autoformalization channel, 2026. Discussion thread. Accessed 18 September
     2026.
[33] J. Leray. Sur le mouvement d’un liquide visqueux emplissant l’espace. Acta Mathematica, 63:193–248, 1934.
[34] G. Luo and T. Y. Hou. Potentially singular solutions of the 3D axisymmetric Euler equations. Proceedings of the National Academy
     of Sciences, 111(36):12968–12973, 2014.
[35] Y. V. Matiyasevich. Hilbert’s Tenth Problem. Foundations of Computing. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1993.
[36] C. McMullen. Families of rational maps and iterative root-finding algorithms. Annals of Mathematics, 125(3):467–493, 1987.
[37] C. McMullen. Braiding of the attractor and the failure of iterative algorithms. Inventiones Mathematicae, 91(2):259–272, 1988.
[38] R. Montague. Universal grammar. Theoria, 36(3):373–398, 1970.
[39] R. Montague. English as a Formal Language. In R. H. Thomason, editor, Formal Philosophy: Selected Papers of Richard Montague,
     pages 188–221. Yale University Press, New Haven, CT, 1974. Originally published in 1970.
[40] Y. N. Moschovakis. A logical calculus of meaning and synonymy. Linguistics and Philosophy, 29(1):27–89, 2006.
     doi:10.1007/s10988-005-6920-7.
[41] M. B. Nathanson. Cantor polynomials and the Fueter–Pólya theorem. The American Mathematical Monthly, 123(10):1001–1012,
     2016. doi:10.4169/amer.math.monthly.123.10.1001.
[42] J. Nečas, M. Růžička, and V. Šverák. On Leray’s self-similar solutions of the Navier–Stokes equations. Acta Mathematica,
     176(2):283–294, 1996.
24                                         A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*


[43] W. V. O. Quine. Meaning and Translation. In R. A. Brower, editor, On Translation, pages 148–172. Harvard University Press,
     Cambridge, MA, 1959.
[44] W. V. O. Quine. On the Reasons for Indeterminacy of Translation. The Journal of Philosophy, 67(6):178–183, 1970.
[45] F. Rabe. How to identify, translate and combine logics? Journal of Logic and Computation, 27(6):1753–1798, 2017.
[46] A. Rammal, N. Patel, F. Gloeckle, A. Hayat, J. Kempe, R. Munos, C. Arnal, and V. Cabannes. Formalizing mathematics at scale.
     arXiv:2605.29955, 2026.
[47] G. Seregin. A certain necessary condition of potential blow up for Navier–Stokes equations. Communications in Mathematical
     Physics, 312(3):833–845, 2012.
[48] J. Serrin. On the interior regularity of weak solutions of the Navier–Stokes equations. Archive for Rational Mechanics and Analysis,
     9:187–195, 1962.
[49] S. Smale. The fundamental theorem of algebra and complexity theory. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 4(1):1–36,
     1981.
[50] S. Smale. Complexity theory and numerical analysis. In Acta numerica, 1997, volume 6 of Acta Numer., pages 523–551. Cambridge
     Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1997.
[51] S. Smale. The work of Curtis T McMullen. In Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians I, Berlin, Doc. Math. J.
     DMV, pages 127–132. 1998.
[52] R. I. Soare. Turing Computability: Theory and Applications. Theory and Applications of Computability. Springer, Berlin–
     Heidelberg, 2016. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-31933-4.
[53] E. M. Stein. Singular Integrals and Differentiability Properties of Functions (PMS-30). Princeton University Press, 1970.
[54] Z.-W. Sun. Ten unknowns for hilbert’s tenth problem over the integers, 2026.
[55] T. Tao. Finite time blowup for an averaged three-dimensional Navier–Stokes equation. Journal of the American Mathematical Soci-
     ety, 29(3):601–674, 2016.
[56] A. Tarski. The Semantic Conception of Truth: and the Foundations of Semantics. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research,
     4(3):341–376, 1944.
[57] The mathlib Community. Mathlib.Order.Lattice.Nat: Conditionally complete linear order structure on the natural numbers. Online
     API documentation. Documentation for Nat.sInf def and Nat.sInf empty. Accessed 18 September 2026.
[58] A. M. Turing. On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical
     Society, S2-42(1):230, 1936.
[59] J. van Benthem. Natural Language and Logic of Agency. Journal of Logic, Language and Information, 23(3):367–382, 2014.
[60] J. van Benthem and F. Liu. New logical perspectives on monotonicity. In D. Deng, F. Liu, M. Liu, and D. Westerståhl, editors,
     Monotonicity in Logic and Language, pages 1–12, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2020. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
[61] S. Weinberger. Computers, Rigidity, and Moduli: The Large-Scale Fractal Geometry of Riemannian Moduli Space. Princeton Uni-
     versity Press, USA, 2004.
                   WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                      25


      A PPENDIX B. F URTHER POTENTIAL MISTRANSLATIONS IN THE NAVIER –S TOKES NL PROOF

B.1. AI generated list (with some human input) of suggested mistranslations. We compare OpenAI’s
Finite time blowup for Navier–Stokes with its Lean sources at commit f9e8bc5. The twelve comparisons
below are generated as a collaboration between ChatGPT and Claude, with some human input.
   Warning – Potential hallucinations: Since the list below is generated with the help of AI, and has not
been fully manually checked, hallucinations may occur. Hence, the list should be taken as a suggestion of
mistranslations that could be checked by others. The purpose of the list is to give an indication of other
potential mistranslations than the examples we provide in §3.
   Notation and references. The singular time is t = 1. In cylindrical coordinates (r, θ, z), r is distance
from the axis and eθ is the angular unit vector. The positive similarity scale q satisfies q − z 2 q 2h = 1 − t,
where 0 < h < 1/100; in particular, q = 1 − t when z = 0. The profile coordinates are X = r2 /(2q)
and η = z/q 1/2−h ; see (3.2), p. 7. The norm ∥ · ∥C m controls all indicated derivatives through order m, and
O(q β ) means a bound by a constant times q β as q ↓ 0. Constants may depend on fixed derivative orders. Page
numbers refer to the 166-page NL paper; Lean paths below are relative to NavierStokes/, and all line
ranges link to the fixed commit.

1. Localization depends on the chosen potential
Paper: Theorem 3.1 represents the local velocity as uloc = curl A + D, where A is a vector potential and
D = Beθ is a direct angular field. Equation (10.4) uses this pair to define uc = curl(cA) + cD, with a smooth
cutoff c.
Lean: The local-theorem pair is A′ = Araw − J, D′ = Draw + curl J, where J is the axial part removed
from the base potential to make A′ vanish in the exterior. The compact candidate instead cuts Araw , Draw .
The theorem velocity eq original identifies the velocities before cutting.
Difference: For the same cutoff, the product rule gives
                            [curl(cAraw ) + cDraw ] − [curl(cA′ ) + cD′ ] = ∇c × J.
This term does not vanish identically for the selected fields. At z = 0, the radial cutoff changes from one to
zero for s = r2 /2 ∈ (1/64, 1/32). At sufficiently late times, the entire segment from s to 1 lies in the heat
                                               ´s
exterior. There the axial coefficient of J is − 1 Fheat (v, t) dv, which is positive because Fheat > 0 and s < 1.
The radial gradient of the cutoff is nonzero somewhere on the transition and is perpendicular to J. Thus the
selected localized velocities differ. Their agreement where c = 1 and the required properties of the compact
candidate are separately proved.
Sources. Theorem 3.1, p. 15; (10.4), p. 118. LocalPotentialRebundle.lean:24–30,
LocalPotentialRebundle.lean:96–109; LocalAngularGrowth.lean:138–147;
R3CompactCandidate.lean:201–202; TailGaugePotential.lean:180–195, TailGaugePotential.lean:228–323;
SpatialLocalization.lean:32–50; RadialHeatProfile.lean:121–122;
PhysicalHeatCoordinates.lean:39–44; PaperLocalization.lean:28–50.
26                                  A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*

2. The cutoff violates the specified domain margin
Paper: The local fields are supplied on Ω∗ = {t < 1, q < q∗ }. Proposition 10.1 chooses the spatial and
temporal cutoffs so that c ̸= 0 implies q < q∗ /2. This leaves room inside the domain for a smooth extension
by zero.
Lean: The cutoffs are fixed independently of q∗ . Both equal one at (t, x) = (3/4, 0). The displayed local
threshold is                                                       
                                                            1            1
                                    q∗ = min Qb ,                     ≤ ,
                                                      2(|a0 | + 1)       2
where Qb > 0 is a selected band scale and a0 is the first entry of the cutoff schedule. At that point q = 1 − t =
1/4, so q < q∗ /2 fails.
Difference: This is a direct counterexample to the paper’s cutoff-selection condition for the simultaneously
displayed Lean choices. The formal construction uses raw fields smooth on all of R3 × {t < 1}, allowing
localization without that margin. The discrepancy is in the domain and extension argument; it does not exhibit
a nonsmooth localized field.
Sources. §3.5, p. 16; Proposition 10.1, p. 118. LocalPaperDomain.lean:16–17; SmoothCutoffs.lean:245–265;
SpatialLocalization.lean:133–151; LocalScaleGeometry.lean:19–23;
LocalPotentialRebundle.lean:78–94.

3. A smooth axis value is replaced by totalized division
Paper: The auxiliary angular-stress quantity Qs is defined for X > 0 by
                                   ´X
                                        H(s, η)Sq (s, η) ds
                      Qs (X, η) = 0                         ,   Qs (0, η) = 12 Sq (0, η).
                                          XH(X, η)
          √
Here H = 2XE = 2XF , E is the angular velocity profile, F is smooth and nonzero at the axis, and Sq is the
smooth source in the radial equation (4.9). The second formula is the smooth extension required after (4.10).
Lean: ProfileHistories.Profiles.angularLag uses the quotient literally at every X. At X = 0,
both numerator and denominator vanish, and Lean’s division convention gives 0. The smooth source here is
NaturalEntrance.Sq; the identity naturalHistories angularSource identifies the integrand
in angularLag with HSq . For the selected entrance profile, source lower gives Sq (0, η) > 5/2 for
|η| ≤ 1, so the smooth right-hand limiting value exceeds 5/4.
Difference: For these entrance data the unweighted functions disagree at the axis, and the raw Lean quotient
is discontinuous there. This does not imply discontinuity of the physical stress: Qs enters it with a vanish-
ing radial factor, and the original code proves the corresponding regular stress identities, including the axis.
Regularity of those weighted quantities does not supply the missing value of the unweighted quotient.
Sources. (4.8)–(4.10), p. 26; (4.11), p. 27. ProfileHistories.lean:554–588; NaturalEntrance.lean:1096–1105,
NaturalEntrance.lean:1231–1267; ActivationStocks.lean:952–970; ZerothStressIdentity.lean:334–352.
                   WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                        27

4. The pressure bump lies outside the reserved mean interval
                                                                                                  √
Paper: Section 8.3 selects a smooth bump ρb with integral one and compact support in Im = { 2X : X ∈
Imean }. Here Imean is a reserved subinterval of the active annulus; the bump removes the radial integral of the
pressure source before compactly supported integration.
                                                                                 √                    √
Lean: The actual pressure gauge supplies the full annulus endpoints a =            2Xa and b =          2Xb to
PressureStream.rho. Its centre is (a + b)/2 and its outer radius is (b − a)/4, so the set on which it
is nonzero is                                                  
                                                3a + b a + 3b
                                                       ,          .
                                                   4        4
In the coordinate log X, the reserved mean interval ends more than three units before the outer edge Xb .
           √
Passing to 2X, its upper endpoint is therefore less than e−3/2 b < b/4.
Difference: The selected bump is disjoint from the paper’s reserved interval, since (3a + b)/4 > b/4. Its
smoothness and unit integral are proved, and the separate stress-repair bumps use the reserved patch. This
establishes a different auxiliary density; it alone does not establish different final pressure or velocity fields.
Sources. §8.3, p. 92. PressureStream.lean:29–60; CorrectionInitialization.lean:4255–4259;
VariableGaugeMean.lean:58–82, VariableGaugeMean.lean:517–523; CommonBaseContext.lean:118–125;
PrimaryTargetBounds.lean:667–668; ReservedPatches.lean:29–64; NominalConeAssembly.lean:1327–1330;
OutgoingSchedule.lean:304–306; OutgoingTail.lean:542–555; CorrectionInitialization.lean:4334–4342.

5. Spatial phase derivatives pay the time-derivative cost
Paper: In Lemma 9.8, Q ∈ (0, 1) is a fixed band scale comparable to q, Φ is an oscillatory phase, and eikνΦ
is its carrier, where k ≤ 2Q−h/2 and the harmonic integer ν is fixed. For a spatial and b time derivatives, with
a + b ≥ 1, the proof retains the respective powers
                                 Q−a/2−b(1+h) ,       Q−a(1/2+h/2)−b(1+3h/2) .
These bounds also include constants and fixed powers of 1 + | log Q|.
Lean: localPhase positive jets bounds the full derivative tensor of order a + b using Q−(a+b)(1+h) .
The carrier and its multiplication by an amplitude are controlled using Q−(a+b)(1+3h/2) ; the same cost is
charged in every direction.
Difference: For a > 0, both comparisons lose an additional factor Q−a(1/2+h) . These are weaker inter-
mediate bounds, rather than the directional estimates displayed in the paper’s proof. Nevertheless, the paper
subsequently uses the common loss ℓm = 2A + (m + 1)(1 + 3h/2), where A = 1/2 + h. Lean proves this final
loss exactly in paper physical loss; the discrepancy does not concern the conclusion of Lemma 9.8.
Sources. Lemma 9.8 and its proof, pp. 113–114. SharpCurrentPhysicalPhase.lean:168–175,
SharpCurrentPhysicalPhase.lean:283–290; SharpCurrentModeJets.lean:18–35;
SharpPhysicalCarrier.lean:12–17; WholeDomainPhysicalStageTheorem.lean:238–264.
28                                   A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*

6. Frozen scale jets and Euler derivatives give equivalent seminorms
Paper: The normalized profile estimates (5.42) and (5.46) use compositions of q∂q , ∂X and ∂η . Repeating
q∂q differentiates its coefficient q as well as the profile. The diagonal bound in (5.46) is imposed for n ≥
max{2, |I|}, where |I| is the derivative order.
Lean: SlowBorelBase.blownJet takes ordinary derivatives of F (qσ, X, η) at σ = 1, keeping the base
scale q fixed. For the pure scale directions, this means
                        ∂σ2 F (qσ, X, η) σ=1 = q 2 ∂q2 F,      (q∂q )2 F = q 2 ∂q2 F + q∂q F.
The AdmissibleScales.blown condition bounds the tensor of order m of the nth summand by 2−n q hn
for n ≥ 1, m ≤ n + 2, 0 < q ≤ 1, and (X, η) in the chosen compact profile set. The theorem
exists admissibleScales constructs a schedule satisfying these conditions.
Difference: The operators are unequal already for F (q) = q: the displayed second derivatives are 0 and q.
This example compares operators, not the selected profiles. At every fixed order the Euler and frozen derivative
families are related by an invertible triangular change of basis with constant coefficients. The same holds for
mixed profile derivatives. Consequently they give equivalent all-order O(q 2h ) estimates. Transferring the
displayed diagonal bound can introduce an order-dependent multiplicative constant; it does not automatically
retain the exact coefficient 2−n . No failure of either the paper’s asymptotic estimates or its numerical bound
is established here.
Sources. (5.42), p. 60; (5.46), p. 61. SlowBorelBase.lean:136–139, SlowBorelBase.lean:289–355,
SlowBorelBase.lean:560–566.

7. The cone margin is chosen on a smaller family
Paper: Appendix C constructs a periodic shear loop with slope ϑ(θ′ ; µ), mean slope m, and amplitude µ ≥ 0.
Write V (µ) = ⟨(ϑ − m)2 ⟩ for its variance, where ⟨·⟩ averages over 0 ≤ θ′ ≤ 2π. The admissible speed
satisfies 2 < v < U (ϑ), with U the upper boundary of the stress cone. After choosing µmax , (C.8) requires
                      U (ϑ(θ′ ; µ)) > 2 + δL    for every 0 ≤ µ ≤ µmax ,            0 < δL < 1.
                                                                                         √        p
Lean: FamilyChoices.cone margin instead quantifies over solved tilts with s = V ≤ 3/amin ,
where amin > 0 is a uniform lower bound for the prescribed angular shear a. Its simultaneously selected
maxAmplitude satisfies V (µmax ) > 3/amin , so that endpoint lies outside this family. The selected inequal-
ities are U ≥ 2 + δ and 0 < δ ≤ 1.
Difference: The selected family is smaller than the full amplitude interval associated with maxAmplitude.
Its margin suffices for the actual loop, whose strict admissibility is proved. The non-strict auxiliary inequalities
are harmless: replacing δ by δ/2 gives a strictly smaller positive margin less than one on the same family. A
generic compact-family theorem can also provide a margin on the larger interval, but that is not the selected
application. This is a difference in auxiliary choices, not a counterexample to the paper’s margin or to the loop
construction.
Sources. (C.4)–(C.8), p. 159; (C.9)–(C.10), p. 160. TrueConeLoop.lean:164–197, TrueConeLoop.lean:371–393,
TrueConeLoop.lean:439–504; LoopVariance.lean:842–854.
                  WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                       29

8. Uniform full-pressure bounds omit decay of the pressure increment
Paper: Fix the outer and axis data and a sufficiently large reference scale Λ. Let C be the subsequent suffi-
ciently large admissible amplitude parameter, φr the normalized reference angular profile, and Π0 (η) the axis
pressure. With η ∈ [−1, 1] and the reference transition width in its prescribed range, the pressure satisfies
                                       ˆ X
             Πr (X, η) − Π0 (η) = C −2      φr (s, η)2 ds,        sup ∥Πr − Π0 ∥Cηk ≤ Kk C −2 .
                                          0                     0≤X≤Xi

Here Xi = 110 is fixed and Kk is independent of admissible C and the transition width. Thus (B.24) retains
smallness as C → ∞, at every fixed order.
Lean: uniform refF normalized controls the η derivatives of Cf , where f = φr /C. The auxiliary
theorem uniform refF instead bounds C −1 by 1. In uniform ref histories, this coarser estimate
is squared and integrated, and the fixed axis pressure is added. The resulting theorem controls the full pressure
uniformly in C; it does not display (B.24)’s C −2 bound for the increment Πr − Π0 . Its indicated consumer
uses uniform full-pressure control.
Difference: The selected intermediate bound omits the smallness of the pressure increment; a bound for the
full pressure is not expected to decay when Π0 does not. Sharp order-zero and first-parameter-derivative
increment bounds are separately proved and used. At every higher fixed order, the normalized-field bounds,
the product rule and the pressure integral formula also imply a C −2 increment bound. Thus this is a difference
in the estimate displayed and used at this step, not evidence that (B.24) fails for the formalized profiles.
Sources. Lemma B.4 and (B.24), pp. 150–151. ReferenceUniformStocks.lean:245–279,
ReferenceUniformStocks.lean:285–310, ReferenceUniformStocks.lean:341–352;
ReferenceBounds.lean:96–139, ReferenceBounds.lean:955–987.

9. A full-tensor estimate gives a coarser mixed-derivative bound
Paper: Lemma 10.3 extends the force beyond t = 1 by summing Gj (x, σ) = χ0 (bj σ)σ j Fj (x)/j!, where
σ = t − 1, Fj is the limiting jth time derivative of the force, χ0 is a fixed smooth cutoff, and bj ≥ 1 controls
its width. For a spatial multi-index α and m time derivatives, (10.12) gives
                                     ∥∂xα ∂σm Gj ∥∞ ≤ Cj,m bm−j
                                                            j   ∥Fj ∥C |α| .
Only time derivatives differentiate the rescaled cutoff.
Lean: SpatialBorelExtension.localizedTerm deriv bound estimates the full derivative
tensor of total order k on a spatial window by bk−j
                                                j   Cj,k,W . Here Cj,k,W is a bound for a fixed template
                                                                                            |α|+m−j
built from Fj on the window W , independent of bj . Setting k = |α| + m therefore incurs bj           . The proof
bounds the norm of the time-rescaling map in all directions.
Difference: Specializing the full-tensor bound to a mixed component gives a coarser scale factor, with an
            |α|
additional bj . This is a cost of the norm estimate, not an actual spatial derivative of the time cutoff. The
template constant controls derivatives of Fj up to k, whereas the paper’s mixed bound uses only order |α|. The
pure-time theorem retains bm−j
                            j   , and the coarser joint estimate still proves convergence with every derivative.
Spatial windows are used for bounds; their cutoffs do not appear in the final extension series.
Sources. Lemma 10.3, (10.11)–(10.12), p. 120. SpatialBorelExtension.lean:63–69,
SpatialBorelExtension.lean:105–174, SpatialBorelExtension.lean:270–304,
SpatialBorelExtension.lean:334–388; BorelExtension.lean:125–155.
30                                      A. BASTOUNIS, F. CIRCELLI, AND A. C. HANSEN*

10. A slower envelope controls the entire future tail
Paper: During the axial transition, the pressure argument uses decay E(y + s, η) ≤ KE(y, η)e−s/2 for every
s ≥ 0. Here y = log(X/XR ) is the logarithmic X-coordinate, with fixed XR > 0, s is an increment in y,
and E is the positive unmodified outgoing angular profile. Squaring and integrating this envelope controls the
                                       ´∞
future pressure integral Π(y, η) = − 12 y E(v, η)2 dv.
Lean: For the actual profile at η = 0, logClock future and finalAngular clock ratio give
                                   E(y + s, 0) ≤ e3/5 E(y, 0)e−2s/5            (y, s ≥ 0).
The squared decay rate is 4/5. Comparisons between E(y, η)2 and E(y, 0)2 then yield
                          ˆ ∞
                               E(v, η)2 dv ≤ 5e6/5 E(y, η)2   (y ≥ 0, |η| ≤ 1).
                               y

Difference: The selected proof uses the slower rate 2/5 instead of 1/2, and transfers a parameter-zero en-
velope to the physical parameter range. The resulting bound is used for the actual pressure. The original
finalAngular release decay proves the sharper rate 1/2 + 3h/4 after the release stage; its later start-
ing point does not replace the all-future argument used here. No failure of the pressure bound or of tail
integrability follows.
Sources. (A.23), p. 133; axial-transition pressure estimate, p. 135; exterior decay, p. 137. FuturePressureBounds.lean:106–160,
FuturePressureBounds.lean:171–217; OutgoingEntranceCone.lean:877–889; TailCone.lean:227–243.

11. The local hierarchy is completed before global repair
Paper: Section 5 builds a formal expansion in powers q 2nh , n ≥ 0. Its coefficients are profiles of the velocity
and pressure in (X, η). At order n, Lemma 5.1 solves the equations near the axis using the already finalized
lower orders. Lemma 5.2 then extends the current profiles and imposes five integral moment conditions, which
confine their stress to an annulus. Only then does the induction proceed to order n + 1.
Lean: SlowRecursion.hierarchy first recursively constructs every local coefficient, without global
moment repair. schemeFromHierarchy cuts these local coefficients to produce the seeds for a second
recursion. In that global recursion, exists step repairs the current seed and recomputes its pressure source
and moments using the already repaired global predecessors.
Difference: The code separates the local and global inductions, whereas the paper interleaves them. The
second recursion takes a completed local hierarchy as input. The theorem profiles inner eq proves
agreement of all four velocity/pressure profile components on a common inner region, including the axis, and
profiles moments proves the global moment conditions. These are the connecting results needed for the
separated construction. This demonstrates a reorganization of the construction and its verification; it does not
by itself demonstrate that the resulting coefficients differ from an admissible implementation of the paper’s
induction.
Sources. §5, p. 45; Lemma 5.1, p. 47; Lemma 5.2, p. 50; Proposition 5.3, p. 55. SlowRecursion.lean:931–972;
GlobalSlowProfiles.lean:770–834, GlobalSlowProfiles.lean:1043–1052,
GlobalSlowProfiles.lean:1090–1118, GlobalSlowProfiles.lean:1812–1825.
                   WHY LEAN VERIFICATION DOES NOT GUARANTEE FAITHFUL AI AUTOFORMALISATION                    31

12. Affine bumps and Rolle’s theorem replace geometric dilates
                                                                                                           √
Paper: Lemma 8.7 repairs five moments on an interior radial interval. In the normalized radius x = r/ q,
the angular moment weights are x2 , x−2−2λ , x−2λ , and the axial weights are x, x1−2λ , with λ > 0 fixed. The
proof chooses geometric dilates βj (x) = e−jd β0 (e−jd x), j = 0, 1, 2, of one nonzero nonnegative bump, with
                            ´
d > 0. Their moments are xp βj (x) dx = µp ejdp , where µp > 0. Dividing rows by µp gives ordinary
Vandermonde matrices. The axial block reuses the first two angular bumps.
Lean: FiveRowRank uses affine copies on evenly spaced cells inside (a, b): for a family of size N , the cell
endpoints are a + (2j + 1)∆N and a + (2j + 2)∆N , with ∆N = (b − a)/(2N + 1) and 0 ≤ j < N . Thus
the angular family uses N = 3, while the axial family uses the different mesh N = 2. Nonsingularity follows
by turning a vanishing moment combination into one zero in each cell, then applying Rolle induction to sums
of distinct powers after logarithmic change of variable.
Difference: The selected bump families and the proof of invertibility differ from those in Lemma 8.7; in
particular, the axial bumps are not the first two angular bumps. However, the paper itself uses Rolle induction
for general separated power-moment bumps in Lemma A.1. Thus the formal argument is closely related to
another argument already in the paper. The five required moment equations, including their signs, are proved.
This is an alternative realization of the moment repair, not missing constraints.
Sources. Lemma 8.7, pp. 97–98; Lemma A.1, pp. 126–127. FiveRowRank.lean:24–31, FiveRowRank.lean:81–107,
FiveRowRank.lean:146–156, FiveRowRank.lean:240–284; LocalizedMomentRepair.lean:21–26,
LocalizedMomentRepair.lean:87–115; PowerMomentMatrix.lean:50–117, PowerMomentMatrix.lean:209–249.

   D EPARTMENT OF M ATHEMATICS , K ING ’ S C OLLEGE L ONDON
   Email address: alexander.bastounis@kcl.ac.uk

   D EPARTMENT OF A PPLIED M ATHEMATICS AND T HEORETICAL P HYSICS , U NIVERSITY OF C AMBRIDGE
   Email address: fac43@cam.ac.uk

   D EPARTMENT OF A PPLIED M ATHEMATICS AND T HEORETICAL P HYSICS , U NIVERSITY OF C AMBRIDGE
   Email address: a.hansen@damtp.cam.ac.uk
